   By-Laws 2025	  Table of Contents  By-Laws	4 BY-LAW NO. 1	4 SECTION 1 - GENERAL	4 1.01 Definitions	4 1.02 Interpretation	4 1.03 Corporate Seal	4 1.04 Execution of Documents	5 1.05 Financial Year End	5 1.06 Banking Arrangements	5 1.07 Annual Financial Statements	5 1.08 Amendments	5 SECTION 2 - MEMBERSHIP	6 2.01 Membership Conditions	6 2.02 Proxies at Meetings	6 2.03 Absentee Voting by Mail Ballot	6 SECTION 3 - MEMBERSHIP DUES, TERMINATION AND DISCIPLINE	8 3.01 Membership Dues	8 3.02 Termination of Membership	8 3.03 Discipline of Members	8 SECTION 4 - MEETINGS OF MEMBERS	10 4.01 Persons Entitled to be Present	10 4.02 Chair of the Meeting	10 4.03 Quorum	10 4.04 Votes to Govern	10 4.05 Annual General Meeting	10 4.06 Special Meetings of Members	10 4.07 Notice of Meetings of Members	11 SECTION 5 - DIRECTORS AND CHAIR OF THE BOARD	12 5.01 Description of Directors	12 5.02 Description of the Chair of the Board	12 5.03 Election and Term	12 5.04 Appointment	12 SECTION 6 - MEETINGS OF DIRECTORS	13 6.01 Calling of Meetings	13 6.02 Notice of Meeting	13 6.03 Regular Meetings	13 6.04 Emergency Meetings	13 6.04 Quorum	13 6.05 Votes to Govern	14 6.06 Committees	14 SECTION 7 - OFFICERS	15 7.01 Description of Officers	15 7.02 Election and Beginning of Term	17 7.03 Vacancy in Office	17 SECTION 8 - SUB-ASSOCIATIONS	18 8.01 Application for Sub-Association Status	18 8.02 Compatibility of Sub-Associations	18 8.03 Dissolution of Sub-Associations	18 SECTION 9 - NOTICES	19 9.01 Method of Giving Notices	19 9.02 Invalidity of any Provisions of this By-Law	19 9.03 Omissions and Errors	19 SECTION 10 - DISPUTE RESOLUTION	20 10.01 Mediation and Arbitration	20 10.02 Dispute Resolution Mechanism	20 SECTION 11 - EFFECTIVE DATE	21 11.01 Effective Date	21  By-Laws  BY-LAW NO. 1  A By-Law relating generally to the conduct of the affairs of The Engineering Students' Society of the University of Ottawa.  BE IT ENACTED as a By-Law of the Society as follows:  SECTION 1 - GENERAL  1.01 Definitions  In this By-Law and all other By-Laws of the Society, unless the context otherwise requires:  a.	"Board" means the Board of Directors of the Society and "Director" means a Member of the Board; b.	"Chair" means the Chair of the Board; c.	"By-Law" means this By-Law and any other By-Laws of the Society as amended and which are, from time to time, in force and effect;  d.	"Meeting of Directors" includes a meeting of the Board of Directors; "meeting of Members" includes an annual meeting of Members or a special meeting of Members; "special meeting of Members" includes a meeting of any class or classes of Members and a special meeting of all Members entitled to vote at an annual meeting of Members;  e.	"ordinary resolution" means a resolution passed by a majority (for example more that 50%) of the eligible votes cast on that resolution;  f.	"special resolution" means a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the eligible votes cast on that resolution;  g.	"Faculty" means the Faculty of Engineering at the University of Ottawa;  h.	"University" means the University of Ottawa;  i.	"Society" means Engineering Students' Society of the University of Ottawa; j.	"UOSU" means the University of Ottawa Students' Union. k.	"Officers" means both Executives, Managers, Commissioners, and Coordinators. The Chair of the Board and Secretaries are Officers but do not have voting rights. 1.02 Interpretation  In the interpretation of this By-Law and all other By-Laws, words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa, words in one gender include all genders, and "person" includes an individual, body corporate, partnership, trust and unincorporated organization. 1.03 Corporate Seal  The Society may have a corporate seal in the form approved from time to time by the Board. If a corporate seal is approved by the Board, the Vice President of Internal Affairs of the Society shall be the custodian of the corporate seal. 1.04 Execution of Documents  Deeds, transfers, assignments, contracts, obligations and other instruments in writing requiring execution by the Society may be signed by any two (2) of the signing authorities as defined by the Policy and Procedure Manual. In addition, the Board may from time to time direct the manner in which and the person or persons by whom a particular document or type of document shall be executed. Any signing authority may certify a copy of an instrument, resolution, By-Law or other document of the Society to be a true copy thereof.  1.05 Financial Year End  The financial year end of the Society shall be April 30 of each year.  1.06 Banking Arrangements  The banking business of the Society shall be transacted at such bank, trust company or other firm or corporation carrying on a banking business in Canada or elsewhere as the Board of Directors may designate, appoint or authorize from time to time by resolution. The banking business or any part of it shall be transacted by an Officer or Officers of the Society and/or other persons as the Board of Directors may by resolution from time to time designate, direct or authorize.  1.07 Annual Financial Statements  The Society shall prepare annual financial statements, including a statement of revenue and expenses, a balance sheet, and any other financial information required by policy. The financial statements shall be made available to all Members by publishing them on the website of the Society within four (4) months after the Annual General Meeting 1.08 Amendments  The Board of Directors may, by special resolution, enact, amend, or repeal any By-Law of the Society. Such enactment, amendment, or repeal shall take effect provisionally upon approval by the Board and shall remain in effect unless and until it is confirmed, amended, or repealed by special resolution at the next meeting of Members. If the Members reject the amendment, the previous By-Law remains in effect as if the amendment had never been made.  The Board of Directors may, by special resolution, enact, amend, or repeal any policy of the Society. Such enactment, amendment, or repeal shall take effect provisionally upon approval by the Board and shall remain in effect unless and until it is confirmed, amended, or repealed by resolution at the next meeting of Members. If the Members reject the amendment, the previous policy remains in effect as if the amendment had never been made."	 2	MEMBERSHIP2.01 Membership Conditions  There shall be three classes of Members in the Society, namely, Active Members, Associate Members and Honorary Members. The following conditions of Membership shall apply:  Active Members  a.	Active voting Membership shall be issued to undergraduate students in the faculty who have paid their Membership dues in full.  b.	The term of Membership of an Active Member shall be annual, subject to renewal in accordance with the policies of the Society.  c.	Each Active voting Member is entitled to receive notice of, attend and vote at all meetings of Members and each such Active voting Member shall be entitled to one (1) vote at such meetings.  Associate Members  a.	Associate non-voting Membership shall be available only to undergraduate students who have applied and have been accepted for Associate Membership by resolution of the Board of Directors. i. 	An Associate Member can pay fees equal to ESS Membership fees in order to become an Active Member b.	The term of Membership of an Associate non-voting Member shall be annual, subject to renewal in accordance with the Policies of the Society.  c.	An Associate non-voting Member shall not be entitled to receive notice of, attend or vote at meetings of the Members of the Society.  Honorary Members  a.	Honorary non-voting Membership shall be available only to Members who have provided outstanding services to the Society and have been accepted for Honorary non-voting Membership in the Society by special resolution in a meeting of Members.  b.	The term of Membership of a Honorary non-voting Member shall be life.  c.	An Honorary non-voting Member shall not be entitled to receive notice or vote at, but shall be entitled to attend meetings of the Members of the Society.  2.02 Proxies at Meetings A Director who is to be absent from a Meeting of Members or a Meeting of Directors may appoint a Proxy to take their place at the meeting. The Proxy must be an Active Member and may not be any other Director. The Proxy's presence in the absent Director's stead may count towards establishing quorum and the Proxy is entitled to speak at, but shall not be entitled to vote at meetings of the Directors and Members. 2.03 Absentee Voting by Mail Ballot  A Member entitled to vote at a meeting of Members or Directors may vote by mailed-in ballot if the Society has a system that:   	 	 	 	 By-Laws a.	enables the votes to be gathered in a manner that permits their subsequent verification, and  b.	permits the tallied votes to be presented to the Society without it being possible for the 	Society to identify how each Member voted.	  3	MEMBERSHIP DUES, TERMINATION AND DISCIPLINE  3.01 Membership Dues  Membership dues shall be paid through the amount of money allocated to the Society by the University of Ottawa's Student Union. Thus, once tuition is paid in full, Membership dues are paid in full. Members who are in programs concurrently belonging to the Faculty and another faculty of the University of Ottawa are considered members so long as the University of Ottawa Student Union pays fees to the Society accounting for these students. 3.02 Termination of Membership  A Membership in the Society is terminated when:  a.	the Member dies, or, in the case of a Member that is a corporation, the corporation is dissolved;  b.	a Member fails to maintain any qualifications for Membership described in Section 2.01 of these By-Laws;  c.	the Member resigns by delivering a written resignation to the Vice President of Finance and Administration of the Society in which case such resignation shall be effective on the date received;  d.	the Member is expelled in accordance with Section 3.03 below or is otherwise terminated in accordance with the By-Laws or policies;  e.	the Member's term of Membership expires; or  f.	the Society is liquidated or dissolved. Upon any termination of Membership, the rights of the Member, including any rights in the property of the Society, automatically cease to exist. Upon termination of Membership, the Society shall not refund any Membership fees that have already been paid by the terminated Member. The University of Ottawa Student Union shall be informed of the Member's termination of membership for the purpose of adjusting the fees paid out to the Society. 3.03 Discipline of Members  The Board shall have authority to suspend or expel any Member from the Society for any one or more of the following grounds:  a.	violating any provision of the By-Laws, or written policies of the Society;  b.	carrying out any conduct which may be detrimental to the Society as determined by the Board in its sole discretion;  c.	for any other reason that the Board in its sole and absolute discretion considers to be reasonable, having regard to the purpose of the Society.  In the event that the Board determines that a Member should be expelled or suspended from Membership in the Society, the president, or such other Officer as may be designated by the Board, shall provide fifteen (15) business days notice of suspension or expulsion to the Member and shall provide reasons for the proposed suspension or expulsion. The Member may make written submissions to the President, or such other Officer as may be designated by the Board, in response to the notice within a fifteen (15) business days period. In the event that no written By-Laws submissions are received by the President, the President, or such other Officer as may be designated by the Board, may proceed to notify the Member that the Member is suspended or expelled from Membership in the Society. If written submissions are received in accordance with this section, the Board will consider such submissions in arriving at a final decision and shall notify the Member concerning such final decision after the next meeting of the Board including a special meeting of the Board The Board's decision shall be final and binding on the Member, without any further right of appeal.	  4	MEETINGS OF MEMBERS  4.01 Persons Entitled to be Present  The only persons entitled to be present at a meeting of Members shall be those entitled to vote as stated in section 2.01, at the meeting, the Directors and such other persons who are entitled or required under any provision of the By-Laws or policies of the Society to be present at the meeting. Any other person may be admitted only on the invitation of the Chair of the meeting or by resolution of the Members.  4.02 Chair of the Meeting  In the event that the Chair of the Board and the President of the Society are absent, the Members who are present and entitled to vote at the meeting shall choose one of their number to chair the meeting.  4.03 Quorum  Quorum at any meeting of the Members shall be 1% of the Members entitled to vote at the meeting. (If a quorum is present at the opening of a meeting of Members, the Members present may proceed with the business of the meeting even if quorum is not present throughout the meeting).  4.04 Votes to Govern  At any meeting of Members every question shall, unless otherwise provided by the By-Laws or policies, be determined by a majority of the eligible votes cast on the question. In case of an equality of votes either on a show of hands or on a ballot or on the results of electronic voting, the president of the meeting shall have a casting vote. Proxies may cast votes as eligible Members but may not cast votes on behalf of the Director in whose stead they are attending. 4.05 Annual General Meeting The Board of Directors shall call an Annual General Meeting (AGM) to be held in March, or the earliest possible date, of each year at a date and time determined by the Board of Directors. The Chair of the Board shall issue a call for member proposals before the AGM. A proposal must be submitted with, if feasible, any relevant supporting documentation in writing to the Chair of the Board no later than twenty-one (21) days before the meeting. A proposal must be supported by at least five (5) Members to be considered. The Board of Directors shall approve the agenda no later than fourteen (14) days before the Meeting of Members. The Board of Directors may modify any proposal, provided that such modifications do not alter the intent of the proposal. 4.06 Special Meetings of Members A Special Meeting of Members may be called by: a.	A resolution of the Board of Directors, or b.	A petition signed by at least ten (10) Members, submitted to the Chair of the Board. By-Laws Upon receipt of a valid petition for a Special Meeting, the Board of Directors shall call the meeting within twenty-one (21) days. The notice for a Special Meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting, and no business other than what is stated in the notice shall be conducted. 4.07 Notice of Meetings of Members Notice of a meeting of Members shall be sent to all Members electronically at least twenty-one (21) days before the meeting. The notice shall include the date, time, location, agenda and any submitted supporting documentation, as approved by the Board of Directors. Failure to receive notice of a Meeting of Members shall not invalidate the meeting unless it can be demonstrated that a substantial number of Members were not properly notified.	 SECTION 5 - DIRECTORS AND CHAIR OF THE BOARD 5.01 Description of Directors Unless otherwise specified by the Board which may modify, restrict or supplement such duties and responsibilities, the Directors of the Society, if designated, shall have the duties and responsibilities associated with their positions as outlined in the policy of the Society. 5.02 Description of the Chair of the Board Unless otherwise specified by the Board which may modify, restrict or supplement such duties and responsibilities, the Chair of the Board, if designated, shall have the following duties and responsibilities associated with their position: a.	The Chair of the Board, if any, shall when present, preside at all meetings of the Board and of the Members.  b.	The Chair shall have such other duties and responsibilities as the Board may specify, or as dictated by the policy.  5.03 Election and Term  The Members will appoint the Chair at a meeting of Members and elect the Directors at a meeting of the Members and at each succeeding meeting at which an election of Directors is required. All Directors shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have a term ending on April 30 of each year.  5.04 Appointment  If the maximum number of Directors has not been elected, the Board of Directors can appoint Directors to the vacant Director positions, at meetings of the Board. The total number of Directors so appointed may not exceed one third of the number of Directors elected at the first meeting of the Board. 	 SECTION 6 - MEETINGS OF DIRECTORS  6.01 Calling of Meetings  Regular meetings of the Directors may be set according to Section 6.03. Other meetings of the Directors may be called by the Chair of the Board, the President of the Society or any two (2) Directors at any time.  6.02 Notice of Meeting  Notice of the time and place for the holding of a meeting of the Board shall be given to every Director of the Society not less than 7 days before the time when the meeting is to be held by one of the following methods:  a.	by electronic or other communication facility at the Director's recorded address for the purpose; or  b.	by an electronic document. Notice of a meeting shall not be necessary if all of the Directors are present, and none object to the holding of the meeting, or if those absent have waived notice of or have otherwise signified their consent to the holding of such meeting. Notice of an adjourned meeting is not required if the time and place of the adjourned meeting is announced at the original meeting. Unless the By-Law otherwise provides, no notice of meeting need specify the purpose or the business to be transacted at the meeting. 6.03 Regular Meetings  The Board may appoint a day or days in any month or months for regular meetings of the Board at a place and hour to be named. A copy of any resolution of the Board fixing the place and time of such regular meetings of the Board shall be sent to each Director forthwith after being passed, but no other notice shall be required for any such regular meeting. 6.04 Emergency Meetings  An emergency meeting of the Board may be called at the discretion of the Chair of the Board or upon the request of at least five (5) Directors. Notice shall be sent electronically to all Directors at least 48 hours in advance and shall include the time, location (if applicable), and agenda of the meeting. The agenda of an emergency meeting shall not be amended other than to reorder or remove items. 6.04 Quorum  Quorum at any meeting of the Board shall be 50% of the Directors, plus one (1), entitled to vote at the meeting. If a quorum is present at the opening of a meeting of the Board, the Directors present may proceed with the business of the meeting even if quorum is not present throughout the meeting. If quorum cannot be met by the Directors entitled to vote at the meeting, then the presence of any Proxies may be counted towards establishing quorum. By-Laws 6.05 Votes to Govern At all meetings of the Board, every question shall be decided by a majority of the eligible votes cast on the question. In case of an equality of eligible votes, the Chair shall have a casting vote. 6.06 Committees  The Board may from time to time appoint any Committee or other advisory body, as it deems necessary or appropriate for such purposes and with such responsibilities as the Board shall see fit. Any such Committee may formulate its own rules of procedure, subject to such regulations or directions as the Board may from time to time make. Any committee member may be removed by resolution of the Board of Directors.	  SECTION 7 - OFFICERS  7.01 Description of Officers Unless otherwise specified by the Board which may modify, restrict or supplement such duties and responsibilities, the Officers of the Society, if designated and if Executives are appointed, shall have the following duties and responsibilities associated with their positions:  a. President  ○ If elected, the President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Society, an Executive, a Director, and shall be responsible for implementing the strategic plans and policies of the Society. If the Chair of the Board is absent, or is unable or refuses to act, the President, if any, shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Board of Directors and of the Members. The President shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of the affairs of the Society.  b.	Vice President of External Affairs  ○	If elected, the Vice President of External Affairs shall be the Chief External Officer of the Society, an Executive, a Director and shall be responsible for reporting on, and maintaining relationships with external entities to the Society. The Vice President of External Affairs shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervisions of the Society's participation in external affairs.  c.	Vice President of Finance and Administration ○	If elected, the Vice President of Finance and Administration shall be the Chief Financial Officer of the Society, an Executive, a Director and shall be responsible for implementing the financial plans and policies of the Society. The Vice President of Financial Affairs shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of the finances of the Society. d.	Vice President of Internal Affairs  ○	If elected, the Vice President of Internal Affairs shall be the Chief Internal Officer of the Society, an Executive, a Director and shall be responsible for maintaining the relationships between the Society and other engineering student groups, as well as run the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition and all subsequent competitions. The Vice President of Internal Affairs shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of the internal affairs of the Society.  e.	Vice President of Academic Affairs  ○	If elected, the Vice President of Academic Affairs shall be an Executive, Director, and responsible for maintaining academic relations with the Faculty and the University. The Vice President of Academic Affairs shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of academic affairs conducted by the Society.  f.	Vice President of Communications ○	If elected, the Vice President of Communications shall be an Executive, Director, and subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of all marketing and promotional activities of the Society.  g.	Vice President of Services  ○	If elected, the Vice President of Services shall be an Executive,  Director, and subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of all services provided by the Society.  h.	Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs ○	If elected, the Vice President of Services shall be an Executive, Director, and be responsible for organizing all philanthropic events for the Society. The Vice President of Philanthropic shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of philanthropic events, specifically with respect to the University and the Society. i.	Vice President of Social Affairs  ○	If elected, the Vice President of Social Affairs shall be an Executive, Director, and subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of all social events of the Society.  j.	Vice President of Equity ○	If elected, the Vice President of Equity shall be an Executive, a Director, and be responsible for upholding and enforcing principles of equity, diversity and inclusion (EDI) throughout the Society. The Vice President of Equity shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of all EDI-related affairs of the Society. k.	Vice President of Francophone Affairs ○	If elected, the Vice President of Francophone Affairs shall be an Executive, a Director, and be responsible for upholding bilingualism within the Society and ensuring that all of the Society's events and services are accessible equally in both official languages of the University of Ottawa. The Vice President of Francophone Affairs shall, subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of all bilingual and Francophone matters of the Society. l.	Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives ○	If elected, the Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives shall be an Executive, Director, and subject to the authority of the Board, have general supervision of all sustainable initiatives of the Society. m.	Managers ○	If appointed, Managers shall perform such duties as outlined in the policy. 7.02 Election and Beginning of Term  The Members of the Society shall elect the Executives of the Society. The Members, Directors or Officers, subject to the policy, shall appoint the Managers of the Society. All Officers, subject to the authority of the Board, shall begin their term on May 1st, or on the date of their appointment in the case of interim Executives appointed by Directors and Managers appointed by Officers to fill vacancies, or on the date of the ratification of the results of the By-Election at which Executives are elected to fill vacancies.  7.03 Vacancy in Office  In the absence of a written agreement to the contrary, the Board may remove with cause, any Executive of the Society by special resolution. Unless so removed, an Executive shall hold office until the earlier of:  a.	April 30; b.	the Executive's resignation;  c.	such Executive ceasing to be a Director (if a necessary qualification of appointment);  d. such Executive's death. If the office of any Executive of the Society shall be or become vacant, the Directors may, by resolution, appoint a person to fill such vacancy, until a By-Election can be held. The interim Executive shall hold office until the ratification of the results of the By-Election, after which the elected Executive takes office.	 SECTION 8 - SUB-ASSOCIATIONS  8.01 Application for Sub-Association Status  Any Association whose specific interest is to represent the students in one or more programs of study of an engineering discipline within the faculty can apply for Sub-Association status. Such an Association may be one that is pre-existing or one that is created solely for the purpose of becoming a Sub-Association of the Society. An application for Sub-Association status must be submitted to the President of the Society and distributed to all Members at minimum of twenty-one (21) days before the meeting of the Board at which the vote for Sub-Association status shall occur. Sub-Association status shall be passed by resolution at the soonest possible meeting of the Board and special resolution at the next meeting of members.  8.02 Compatibility of Sub-Associations  Only one Association may hold Sub-Association status for a specific program of study. If Sub- Association status is being requested for a specific program of study which is already acquired, the requester shall obtain signatures from 10% of the Members from the program of study being contested. 8.03 Dissolution of Sub-Associations A Sub-Association may be considered dissolved if any of the following criteria are met: a.	A representative or representatives of the Sub-Association submit notice to the President of the Society or the Chair of the Board declaring it as such; or b.	The Sub-Association ceases to perform its functions as a Sub-Association and/or its duties and services to the Members and/or the Society as outlined in the Sub-Association's own governing documents and/or the Society's policy and reasonable attempts to reinstate these functions are unsuccessful. Once a Sub-Association is considered dissolved, it loses its Sub-Association status. Thus, any Association that seeks to replace an Association that lost its Sub-Association status due to dissolution as the Sub-Association for the program or programs of study in question may apply for Sub-Association status as outlined in section 8.01 without needing to meet the condition of section 8.02.	 SECTION 9 - NOTICES  9.01 Method of Giving Notices  Any notice (which term includes any communication or document) to be given (which term includes sent, delivered or served), pursuant to the By-Laws or otherwise to a Member, Director, Executive or Member of a committee of the Board shall be sufficiently given:  a.	if sent to such person by electronic or other communication facility at such person's recorded address for the purpose; or  b.	if provided in the form of an electronic document published to the website of the Society. The Vice President of Communications may change or cause to be changed the recorded address of any Member, Director, Executive, or Member of a Committee of the Board in accordance with any information believed by the Vice President of Communications to be reliable. The declaration by the Vice President of Communications that notice has been given pursuant to this By-Law shall be sufficient and conclusive evidence of the giving of such notice. 9.02 Invalidity of any Provisions of this By-Law  The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this By-Law shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining provisions of this By-Law.  9.03 Omissions and Errors  The accidental omission to give any notice to any Member, Director, Executive, Member of a Committee of the Board, or the non-receipt of any notice by any such person where the Society has provided notice in accordance with the By-Laws or any error in any notice not affecting its substance shall not invalidate any action taken at any meeting to which the notice pertained or otherwise founded on such notice. 	 SECTION 10 - DISPUTE RESOLUTION  10.01 Mediation and Arbitration  Disputes or controversies among Members, Directors, Officers, Committee Members, or volunteers of the Society are as much as possible to be resolved in accordance with mediation and/or arbitration as provided in Section 10.02 of this By-Law.  10.02 Dispute Resolution Mechanism  In the event that a dispute or controversy among Members, Directors, Officers, Committee Members or volunteers of the Society arising out of or related to the By-Laws or policies, or out of any aspect of the operations of the Society is not resolved in private meetings between the parties, then without prejudice to or in any other way derogating from the rights of the Members, Directors, Officers, committee Members, employees or volunteers of the Society as set out in the By-Laws or policies, and as an alternative to such person instituting a lawsuit or legal action, such dispute or controversy shall be settled by a process of dispute resolution as follows:  a.	The dispute or controversy shall first be submitted through the internal conflict form managed by the Vice President of Equity with indication that the party wants this internal conflict to follow the process outlined in this section. b.	The Vice-President of Equity shall then organize a panel of mediators. The panel of mediators consists of: i.	a mediator appointed by the instigating party, ii.	a mediator appointed by the other party (or if applicable the Board of the Society) and, iii.	the Returning Officer, or a third mediator that is jointly appointed by the two mediators, as agreed upon by both parties. The three mediators will then meet with the parties in question in an attempt to mediate a resolution between the parties. c.	The number of mediators may be reduced from three to one or two upon agreement of the parties. d.	If the parties are not successful in resolving the dispute through mediation, the parties agree that the dispute shall be settled by arbitration before a single arbitrator, who shall not be any one of the mediators referred to above, in accordance with the Provincial or Territorial legislation governing domestic arbitration in force in the Province or Territory where the registered office of the Society is situated or as otherwise agreed upon by the parties to the dispute. The parties agree that all proceedings relating to arbitration shall be kept confidential and there shall be no disclosure of any kind. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding and shall not be subject to appeal on a question of fact, law or mixed fact and law. e.	All costs of the mediators appointed in accordance with this section shall be borne equally by the parties to the dispute or the controversy. All costs of arbitrators appointed in accordance with this section shall be borne by such parties as may be determined by the arbitrators. SECTION 11 - EFFECTIVE DATE  11.01 Effective Date  Subject to matters requiring a special resolution, this By-Law shall be effective when made by the Board.   CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.  Dated as of the 6th day of March, 2016.  Nicholas Burgel  Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017  Chloe Hayes  Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.  Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members and confirmed by special resolution on the 15th day of September, 2024 Sofia Ershova       Maya Benhamou     Ryn Basinger     Mackenzie Conrad Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye 	Daniel Thorp Brooke MacQuarrie  	 	 	 	 By-Laws  	 	 	 	 By-Laws  	 	 	 	 By-Laws SECTION  - 	  	 	 	 	 By-Laws SECTION  - 	  	 	 	 	 By-Laws  	 	 	 	 By-Laws  	 	 	 	 By-Laws  	 	 	 	 By-Laws  	 	 	 	 By-Laws 