Policy and Procedure Manual  
Policy and Procedure Manual 2025  
________________


Table of Contents
1.0 Board Member Policy
1.1 Purpose
1.2 Scope
1.3 Policy
1.3.1 Chair of the Board
1.3.2 Secretary of the Board
1.3.3 Accountability Officer
1.3.4 Year Representatives
1.4 Effective Date
2.0 Executive Member Policy
2.1 Purpose
2.2 Scope
2.3 Policy
2.3.1 General Eligibility
2.3.2 Roles of the President
2.3.3 Roles of the Vice President of External Affairs
2.3.4 Roles of the Vice President of Finance and Administration
2.3.5 Roles of the Vice President of Academic Affairs
2.3.6 Roles of the Vice President of Communications
2.3.7 Roles of the Vice President of Internal Affairs
2.3.8 Roles of the Vice President of Services
2.3.9 Roles of the Vice President of Social Affairs
2.3.10 Roles of the Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs
2.3.11 Roles of the Vice President of Equity
2.3.12 Roles of the Vice President of Francophone Affairs
2.3.13 Roles of the Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives
2.3.14 Executive Elections
2.4 Effective Date
3.0 Manager Policy
3.1 Purpose
3.2 Scope
3.3 Policy
3.3.1 Definition and Creation of Managers
3.3.2 Eligibility
3.3.3 Appointment
3.3.4 Roles of the Manager of Marketing
3.3.5 Roles of the Manager of Social Media
3.3.6 Roles of the Manager of Information Technology
3.3.7 Roles of the Manager of Sponsorship
3.3.8 Roles of the Manager of Sports
3.3.9 Roles of the Manager of Translations
3.3.10 Roles of the Manager of Student Advocacy
3.3.11 Roles of the Manager of External Awareness
3.3.12 Roles of the Wine and Cheese Coordinator
3.3.13 Roles of the 101 Week Coordinator
3.4 Effective Date
4.0 Coordinator Policy
4.1 Purpose
4.2 Scope
4.3 Policy
4.3.1 Appointment
4.3.2 Eligibility
4.3.3 Term
4.3.4 Roles of the 101 Week Coordinator
4.3.5 Roles of the Wine and Cheese Coordinator
5.0 Commissioner Policy
5.1 Purpose
5.2 Scope
5.3 Policy
5.3.1 Appointment
5.3.2 Eligibility
5.3.3 Roles of the Charity Commissioner
5.3.4 Roles of the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner
5.3.5 Roles of the ERTW Commissioner
5.3.6 Accountability Officer
5.3.7 Roles of the Commissioner of Finance
5.3.8 Roles of the Selection Commissioner
5.3.9 Roles of the Commissioner of Francophone Outreach
5.4 Effective Date
6.0 Committee Policy
6.1 Purpose
6.2 Scope
6.3 Policy
6.3.1 Selection Committee
6.3.2 Graphic Design Committee
6.3.3 University of Ottawa Engineering Competition (uOEC) Committee
6.3.4 Marketing Committee
6.3.5 101 Week Committee
6.4 Effective Date
7.0 Sub-Association Policy
7.1 Purpose
7.2 Scope
7.3 Policy
7.3.1 Recognized Sub-Associations
7.3.2 Requirements
7.3.3 Funding
7.3.4 Director Position
7.4 Effective Date
8.0 Removal from Office Policy
8.1 Purpose
8.2 Scope
8.3 Policy
8.3.1 Impeachment
8.3.2 Resignation
8.4 Effective Date
9.0 Financial Controls Policy
9.1 Purpose
9.2 Scope
9.3 Policy
9.3.1 Signing Authority
9.3.2 Budget
9.3.3 Expense Reimbursement
9.4 Effective Date
10.0 Transition policy
10.1 Purpose
10.2 Scope
10.3 Policy
10.3.1 Creation of a Position Handbook
10.3.2 Access to Handbook
10.3.3 Transition Meeting
10.4 Effective Date
11.0 Locker Policy
11.1 Purpose
11.2 Scope
11.3 Policy
11.3.1 Rental Duration and Fees
11.3.2 Liability
11.3.3 Renewal
11.3.4 Transfer
11.4 Effective Date
12.0 Equipment Rental Policy
12.1 Purpose
12.2 Scope
12.3 Policy
12.3.1 Use
12.3.2 Fees
12.3.3 Damage
12.4 Effective Date
13.0 Inclusivity Policy
13.1 Purpose
13.2 Scope
13.3 Policy
13.3.1 ESS Accountability
13.3.2 Discipline
13.3.3 Exemptions
13.4 Effective Date
14.0 Procurement Policy
14.1 Purpose
14.2 Scope
14.3 Policy
14.3.1 Translation Verification
14.3.2 Vendor Selection
14.3.3 Conflict of Interest
14.3.4 Financial Oversight
14.4 Compliance
14.5 Effective Date
15.0 Language Test Policy
15.1 Purpose
15.2 Scope
15.3 Policy
15.4 Effective Date


Highlighted sections of this Policy Manual have been adopted by the Board of Directors with provisional effect. These sections remain in force unless and until they are confirmed, amended, or repealed by the Members at the next meeting of Members.
________________
1. Board Member Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the responsibilities, expectations, and internal procedures of Board Members and Officers involved in the governance of the Society.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all individuals serving on the Board of Directors, including the Officers of the Board.
   3. Policy
      1. Chair of the Board
The Chair of the Board shall:
1. be responsible for maintaining order during meetings of the Board of Directors, and Members;
   1. attend officer meetings to ensure accountability.
2. be knowledgeable of Robert’s Rules of Order, the ESS policy and procedures and the by-laws;
   1. conduct meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order Revised.
3. be unbiased, objective and impartial for the duration of the meeting;
4. maintain all documents of the Society during their tenure as Chair, including but not limited to:
   1. meeting minutes;
   2. a record of the Board of Directors;
   3. a record of Officers and any changes;
   4. a record of Members; and
   5. all Instruments of the Society.
5. appoint at least one (1) Secretary as per ‎1.3.2 Secretary of the Board at the first meeting of the academic year;
   1. In the event that the secretary is unable to fulfil their duties at a meeting, the Chair shall appoint a replacement secretary for the duration of their absence.
6. have other duties and responsibilities as voted upon by the Board for the duration of said meeting;
7. ensure the agenda is formed and distributed to the Board by a deadline established by the Board of Directors at the first meeting of each academic year;
8. promote ESS events;
9. be informed of any major changes or incidents within ESS;
10. be responsible for the accountability of executive and director mandates as well as membership infractions, and keep a centralized record to be made available with redactions to the Board upon request;
   1. Individuals must be notified and given an opportunity to respond before being added to the record. They may appeal to the Board, which may amend or remove entries by majority vote.
11. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
12. ensure that the Board of Directors meetings and related communications (minutes, attached documents, publicity, among others) are accessible to both Francophone and Anglophone students.
         1. Eligibility of the Chair of the Board
1. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy.
      1. Secretary of the Board
The Secretary of the Board shall:
1. not be a Director on the Board;
2. take minutes at all meetings of the Board and of the Members; and
   1. responsible for sending the minutes to the Manager of IT.
3. promote the activities of the Board in coordination with the Manager of Social Media, including meeting notices and summaries, board members introductions, and updates;
4. not have voting rights.
      1. Accountability Officer
The Accountability Officer shall:
1. report to both the Chair of the Board and the Vice President of Equity;
2. act as a neutral advisor to the Executive and Board by providing institutional context and supporting continuity across terms;
3. assist the Chair of the Board in upholding governance best practices, procedural fairness, and ethical conduct;
4. assist the Chair of the Board in monitoring the fulfillment of executive and director mandates;
5. act as an unbiased mediator for internal conflicts when requested;
6. support or conduct preliminary reviews of alleged policy violations or conflicts when authorized by the Chair or a majority vote of the Board;
7. maintain confidentiality and impartiality in all proceedings and may submit recommendations to the Board as needed; and
8. receive governance-related concerns from Members and advise them on appropriate processes or escalation pathways.
         1. Eligibility for Accountability Officer
To be appointed as Accountability Officer, an active Member must:
1. have previously served as an Executive or Chair of the Board.
      1. Year Representatives
         1. Eligibility
All year representatives of the Society shall:
1. be active Members;
2. be in good standing with the Society and faculty; and
3. be able to represent their year and program.
         1. Positions Election 
A meeting of Members shall be held each September An election will be held at the Annual General Meeting (AGM) to elect the following Members by ordinary resolution of the Members:
1. One second-year representative from each of the following;
   1. Chemical engineering;
   2. Civil engineering;
   3. Electrical engineering;
   4. Mechanical engineering;
   5. Biomedical mechanical engineering;
   6. Software engineering;
   7. Computer engineering; and
   8. the French stream.
2. One third-year representative from each of the following;
   1. Chemical engineering;
   2. Civil engineering;
   3. Electrical engineering;
   4. Mechanical engineering;
   5. Biomedical mechanical engineering;
   6. Software engineering;
   7. Computer engineering; and
   8. the French stream.
3. One fourth-year or higher representative from each of the following;
   1. Chemical engineering;
   2. Civil engineering;
   3. Electrical engineering;
   4. Mechanical engineering;
   5. Biomedical mechanical engineering;
   6. Software engineering;
   7. Computer engineering; and
   8. the French stream.
4. One co-op representative from each of the following;
   1. Chemical engineering;
   2. Civil engineering;
   3. Electrical engineering;
   4. Mechanical engineering;
   5. Biomedical mechanical engineering;
   6. Software engineering; and
   7. Computer engineering.
5. One representative from the Multidisciplinary Design program; and
6. One representative who is registered with SASS.
7. One representative who represents the John McEntyre Team Space (JMTS) who must be an engineering student under ESS. 
A meeting of Members shall be held each September to elect the following Members by ordinary resolution of the Members:
1. One first-year representative from each GNG 1105 class of the fall semester;
2. One first-year representative from each GNG 1505 class of the fall semester;
3. One first-year representative who is enrolled in the SEG 2900 class of the fall semester; and
4. One first-year representative who is enrolled in the PHY 1121/PHY 1521 class of the fall semester.
The following ex-officio members shall be members of the Board, without voting rights:
1. One representative of the UOSU Board of Directors; and
2. The Chair of the Engineering Endowment Fund.
         1. Responsibility
The responsibility of the year representatives listed in section ‎1.3.3.2 shall be:
1. to be a Director of the Society and represent their class at the meetings of the Board in terms of voting and opinions stated;
2. to report to the Society from their individual classes about issues to be addressed;
3. to report back to the class and make class presentations for the Society;
4. to participate and help with the initiative put forth by the Officers; and
5. to submit an academic report to the VP Academic each Semester.
The responsibility of the JMTS student representative shall be: 
1. to be a Director of the Society and represent the JMTS teams at the meetings of the Board in terms of voting and opinions stated;
2. meet regularly with members from each JMTS team and report to the Society about issues to be addressed regarding issues in the JMTS space;
3. to report back to the teams for the Society; and
4. to participate and help with the initiative put forth by the Officers; 
         1. Incompatibility 
No Member may hold more than one (1) vote at a meeting of the Board.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Maya Benhamou        Daniel Thorp
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye        Daniel Thorp        Brooke MacQuarrie
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Dakota Squires        Maya Benhamou
________________
2. Executive Member Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the responsibilities, expectations, and structure of the Executives of the Society to ensure clarity and accountability in their roles.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all individuals serving as Executives of the Society.
   3. Policy
      1. General Eligibility
Any active Member of the Society may run for an Executive position of the Society provided that the Member:
1. is in good standing with the Society and faculty;
2. will be in their second year at the University of Ottawa, or greater, while in office; and
3. will be taking three (3) or more classes or on a co-op term in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the President
The President of the Society shall:
1. oversee all the Vice-President positions;
2. be an ex-officio Member of all committees of the ESS;
3. work with Officers to report recommendations to the Board of Directors;
4. work to ensure positive relations with Members, professional and public organizations, administrative bodies and the media as the official spokesperson of the Society;
5. organize a weekend-long transition meeting before the end of July for all outgoing and incoming Officers of the Society;
6. organize one (1) team-building event per semester for the Officers of the Society;
7. run mandatory meetings with the other Officers;
   1. during the summer semester, meetings shall be held on a monthly basis;
   2. during the fall and winter semesters, meetings shall be held on a bi-weekly basis; and
   3. additional meetings shall be held as deemed necessary.
8. ensure the Society’s By-Laws, policies and values are upheld, updated and modernized;
   1. hold one (1) constitution review session per academic year.
9. write an update on the Society’s affairs each semester to be published on the website and presented at the AGM, sent in a mailout, and highlighted on all social media to ensure transparency to the student body;
   1. This can include, but is not limited to, the approved budget and executive updates.
10. maintain the history, lore and culture of the Society;
11. advertise the election of the Engineering Endowment Fund (EEF) Chair;
   1. sit in on or send a proxy to the EEF advisory and executive committees meeting each semester.
12. select camp leaders for the Iron Ring Ceremony;
13. in case of emergency, they, after a successful special resolution vote of the Executive, assume responsibilities that do not officially fall within their functions, as provided for in the by-laws of the Society;
14. sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Presidents’ Round Table;
15. ensure that only Members are eligible to attend conferences and/or competitions;
16. assess team dynamics by conducting semesterly surveys through an anonymous platform such as ITPMetrics;
17. appoint the Chief Electoral Officer as per 2.3.14.2.
18. organize all elections and report the results to members;
19. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
20. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
         1. Eligibility for President
To run for President, an Active Member must:
1. have completed at least eight months as an Executive Member of the Society;
2. reside in the Ottawa region while holding office;
3. meet all criteria aforementioned, or the candidacy will be open in a sequential order;
   1. if there is no other candidate who meets all requirements in ‎2.3.2.1.a and ‎2.3.2.1.b, the running will be open to all candidates that have previously served as an Officer of the Society;
   2. if there is no other Candidate who meets all requirements in ‎2.3.2.1.d.i, the running will be open to all candidates that have previously served as a Director of the Society; and
   3. if there is no other Candidate who meets all requirements in ‎2.3.2.1.d.ii, the running will be open to all Candidates that are an active Member of the Society.
4. be able to complete the Presidential duties during the entire term of office; and
5. must have, or obtain at the expense of the ESS, Emergency First Aid and CPR C or higher certification by the start of 101 Week activities.
6. in the event of Co-Presidents being elected, they are to share the role and responsibilities of the President mandate as stated in 2.3.2
      1. Roles of the Vice President of External Affairs
The Vice President of External Affairs (VP External) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Manager of Sports;
2. oversee the position of Selection Commissioner and help with the Selection Committee, whose purpose is to select all delegates to attend all applicable conferences;
3. be responsible for the registration and travel of all delegates;
4. host and organize a Pre-delegate meeting for each ESS delegation prior to attendance of the conference;
5. act as the Head-Delegate for all conferences and represent the University of Ottawa on the ESSCO and CFES councils;
   1. should the Vice President of External Affairs be unable to attend any external meeting, they shall be responsible for appointing a proxy and/or head delegate as required as per ESSCO and CFES rules.
6. report recommendations based on the functioning of other Engineering Students’ Societies to the Board of Directors;
7. increase the visibility of the Society and protect its reputation within the University and the public;
8. ensure that each delegate that attended the conference presents a takeback at the following Board of Directors meeting in the form of a report, presentation or video
9. write a report about each conference attended during the semester to be posted on the website, referencing the delegate takebacks if needed, and provide a summary to the Board of Directors. If the VP External sends another member as the head delegate, they shall create the report and forward it to the VP External who must present it to the Board;
10. write a report each semester on how different Engineering Societies operate and how the Society could bring about these changes;
11. facilitate communication with other Engineering Societies as well as provide inter-university contacts to the Officers of the Society;
12. ensure that Members are informed of opportunities available through the Engineering Students Societies’ Council of Ontario (ESSCO) and the Canadian Federation of Engineering Students (CFES);
13. ensure that the Society remains in good standing with ESSCO and CFES;
   1. to leave or change the status of the Society in reference to the aforementioned organizations will be determined by a special resolution at a Board of Directors meeting followed by a special resolution at a Meeting of Members;
      1. an email shall be sent out to all Members to maintain an informed Membership;
14. promote the opportunity of hosting a conference and aid the host committee;
15. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
16. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Finance and Administration
The Vice President of Finance and Administration (VPFA) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Manager of Sponsorship;
2. report recommendations of fiscal policies to the Board of Directors;
3. present the annual budget to the Board of Directors 14 days before 101 Week;
4. prepare for each meeting of the Board of Directors a financial report, consisting of:
   1. all cheques written;
   2. all funds received;
   3. all monies owed to the Society;
   4. all monies owed by the Society; and
   5. a realized, up-to-date copy of the budget.
5. present a summary of the financial report at each meeting of the Board of Directors and have it published on the website within seven (7) days of the meeting;
6. make the approved annual budget available on the website and to all Members upon request;
7. be responsible for completing all UOSU audits and submitting them on time;
8. assist the Officers with all funding applications;
9. ensure that any cash collected by the Society is counted bi-weekly;
   1. a Member who is not in possession of a key to the register must be present during the counting of the money.
10. get a monthly report from the Manager of Sponsorship on what progress has been made;
11. sit in on or send proxy to the University of Ottawa Student Union Money Round Table;
12. sit in on or send a proxy to the EEF advisory and executive committees meeting each semester;
13. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
14. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
         1. Eligibility for Vice President of Finance and Administration
To run for VPFA, an active Member must:
1. be at least 18 years of age at the start of their mandate.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Academic Affairs
The Vice President of Academic Affairs (VP Academic) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Wine and Cheese Coordinator;
2. oversee the position of Manager of Student Advocacy;
3. act as the official ombudsperson for any and all academic concerns brought forward by undergraduate engineering students, and to do so in confidence as requested by the student(s) or the Council;
4. compile at least one (1) report per semester on academic issues facing students to be presented to the Dean of Engineering;
5. work to ensure that Engineering Students at the Faculty learn to effectively utilize all existing school services available to them, to introduce useful concepts and skills to ensure both academic and professional success;
6. sit in on or send proxy the Curriculum Committee of the faculty;
7. hold monthly meetings with the Vice Dean Academic of the Faculty;
8. sit or send a proxy to the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) meetings;
9. sit in on or send a proxy to the Library Committee;
10. sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union University Affairs Round Table;
11. obtain statistics on academic issues facing students by communicating with students of the University on a regular basis;
12. meet with the year representatives on the Board at least once per semester to discuss academic issues;
13. hold one (1) Wine and Cheese during both the fall and winter semesters;
14. hold one (1) industry event during both the fall and winter semesters;
   1. which can include but is not limited to:
      1. field trips;
      2. speaker nights; or
      3. career fairs.
15. hold one (1) Resume Workshop per academic year;
16. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
17. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Communications
The Vice President of Communications (VP Communications) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Manager of Information Technology (IT);
2. oversee the position of Manager of Social Media;
3. oversee the position of Manager of Marketing;
4. be responsible for all publicity pertaining to the Society;
5. ensure all publicity is posted in English and French, preferably on the same notice;
6. coordinate the production of the engineering handbook to be available before 101 Week;
7. ensure that the reputation of the Society is upheld on social media;
8. ensure all Society events and services are advertised on the Society’s social media accounts and through bi-weekly mailouts;
9. maintain an updated email list of all full Members of the Society;
10. report recommendations on all matters, informational and technological, to the Board of Directors;
11. ensure the availability and accessibility of meeting minutes;
   1. from meeting of the Board; and
   2. from meetings of Members.
12. create other engaging content for the social media accounts;
13. evaluate and seek out new forms of communications to engage with more members of the Society;
14. sit in on or send a proxy to the University of Ottawa Student Union Communications round table;
15. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
16. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
         1. Eligibility for Vice President of Communications
To run for VP Communications, an active Member must:
1. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Internal Affairs
The Vice President of Internal Affairs (VP Internal) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner, whose purpose is to plan and run this competition in the fall semester;
   1. this will act as a qualifying round to the Ontario Engineering Competition (OEC);
   2. ensure the travel and accommodations for all eligible teams competing in the OEC and the Canadian Engineering Competition (CEC);
2. work with the faculty to plan activities as part of National Engineering Month;
3. organize four (4) events during the school year, events for NEM may be counted towards this objective;
4. oversee the workings of the different Sub-Associations of the Society, and coordinate the activities of those Sub-Associations with the VP Social;
5. provide guidance and access to applicable ESS services to sub-associations should they require it;
6. meet with Sub-Association representatives at least once per semester to ensure the Society’s Policies and Procedure Manual are upheld, as defined in ‎6.0 Sub-Association Policy;
7. meet with engineering teams to improve relations and maintain communications.
8. be in charge of the hiring process of Managers outside of the appointment process that takes place at the AGM.
9. take minutes at all officer meetings and make them publicly available;
10. manage the volunteer database and record volunteer hours;
11. maintain the office and order office supplies as needed;
12. organize a volunteer appreciation event;
13. in the event of a presidential resignation, the VP Internal will fulfill the responsibilities of the President until an Interim President is appointed;
14. provide assistance to the President as requested;
15. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
16. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
         1. Eligibility for Vice President of Internal Affairs
To run for VP Internal, an active Member must:
1. not hold an executive position on any Sub-Association and may not become an executive of a Sub-Association.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Services
The Vice President of Services (VP Services) of the Society shall:
1. form and lead the Graphic Design Committee, whose purpose is to provide designs and artwork for use by the Society;
2. obtain and maintain bilingual engineering merchandise to be sold by the Society;
3. organize at least one (1) fitting session per academic year for leather jackets;
4. maintain the lockers and the list of registered lockers;
5. establish all prices for products sold by the Society in conjunction with the VPFA;
6. maintain an active catalogue of available merchandise on the Society’s website;
7. maintain all equipment that can be rented by the Society;
8. hold one (1) patch related event to:
   1. maintain and promote the patch culture;
   2. maintain and promote covie culture.
9. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
10. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Social Affairs
The Vice President of Social Affairs (VP Social) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Manager of 101 Week;
2. form and oversee the 101 Week Committee;
3. organize 101 Week and pass on updates to the Executive during the summer meetings;
   1. this week should include but is not limited to the following:
      1. two (2) wet events following guidelines set by UOSU;
      2. one (1) icebreaker event to get to know your peers;
      3. one (1) event to get to know the city of Ottawa;
      4. one (1) messy day event to be initiated into engineering culture;
      5. one (1) event in collaboration with the Undergraduate Nursing Student Association (UNSA);
      6. one (1) event in collaboration with the Science Students’ Association (SSA); and
      7. one (1) event in collaboration with the Computer Science Students’ Association (CSSA).
4. hold one (1) STAGED per academic year;
5. hold three (3) DUSTEDs, one (1) per semester;
6. hold two (2) Iron Ring After Parties, one (1) to be hosted in the evening following each Iron Ring Wine and Cheeses;
7. hold one (1) GOAT in each of the fall and winter semesters immediately following exams;
8. hold two (2) social events which are accessible to all students per academic year; and
   1. hold one (1) of these social events with another Recognized Student Government of the University of Ottawa;
9. conduct one (1) post-event survey following the conclusion of 101 Week;
10. if requested, aid the VP Social of a sub-association in the preparation of a social event;
11. sit in on or send a proxy to the University of Ottawa Student Union Social Round Table;
12. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
13. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
         1. Eligibility for Vice President of Social Affairs
To run for VP Social, an active Member must:
1. reside in Ottawa over the summer; and
2. must have, or obtain at the expense of the ESS, Emergency First Aid and CPR C or higher certification by the start of 101 Week activities.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs
The Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs (VP Philanthropic) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Charity Commissioner;
2. hold one (1) philanthropic campaign during the fall and winter semesters;
3. form and lead the Engineering Charity Ball Committee, whose purpose is to organize and run the annual engineering charity ball;
4. participate in philanthropic events organized by ESSCO and CFES;
5. organize at least one (1) philanthropic event for 101 Week;
6. assist the VP Social with the organization of 101 Week philanthropic events as required;
7. coordinate all social events with a philanthropic nature throughout the academic year;
8. sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Philanthropic Round Table;
9. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
10. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Equity
The Vice President of Equity (VP Equity) shall:
1. oversee the position of Accountability Officer, ;
2. write an equity report each semester to be posted on the website and provide a summary to the Board of Directors;
3. organize anti-oppression training for Officers, Directors, and representatives of Sub-Associations;
4. maintain an internal conflict form and help manage any conflicts with the help of the Accountability Officer, ;
5. sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Equity Round Table;
6. sit in on or send a proxy to the faculty EDI advisory committee;
7. host at least one (1) morale event each Fall and Winter semester;
8. host at least one (1) diversity event each Fall and Winter semester;
9. advocate for equitable rights in the Society and its activities as specified in ‎12.0 Inclusivity Policy;
10. maintain good relations with marginalized groups in the engineering community at the University of Ottawa;
   1. maintain communications with the sub-associations and equitable clubs.
   2. plan one (1) join equity-focused event per year.
11. attend the Conference on Diversity in Engineering or equivalent;
12. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
13. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Francophone Affairs
The Vice President of Francophone Affairs (VP Francophone) of the Society shall:
1. oversee the position of Manager of Translations;
2. form and oversee the French Translation and Content Supervisory Committee;
3. represent the interests of francophone engineering students;
4. ensure that bilingualism of ESS is upheld, respected, and followed;
5. organize one (1) French-language event for 101 Week;
6. organize one (1) activity for Mois de la Francophonie;
7. organize one (1) additional French-language event for Francophone engineering students each Fall and Winter semester;
8. work to ensure the quality of French-language programs and courses at the Faculty;
9. sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Francophone Affairs Roundtable;
10. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
11. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
         1.  Eligibility for Vice President of Francophone Affairs
To run for VP Francophone, an active Member must:
1. Self-identify as a Francophone student; and
2. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy.
      1. Roles of the Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives
The Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives (VP Sustainability) of the Society shall:
1. seek ties with sustainable clubs and ventures at the University of Ottawa, as well as maintain ties with the University of Ottawa's sustainability office;
2. support internal sustainability-related events and affairs;
3. consult on sustainability initiatives related to or involving the Society or the faculty;
4. complete a formal semesterly evaluation of the Society’s sustainability practices to be posted on the website;
5. attend the Conference on Sustainability in Engineering or equivalent;
6. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
7. unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Executive Elections
         1.  Election Period
Elections shall be held in two stages, with Presidential elections taking place in November and all other executive elections taking place in January.
Once voted in, the new team will begin shadowing their predecessor until their mandate begins in May.
         2.  Chief Electoral Officer
Any person who is not a candidate, official representative, or candidate’s volunteer in the election can be selected as Chief Electoral Officer.
Preferably, the Chief Electoral Officer shall not be an engineering student. In the event that such a person could not be found, the Officers shall nominate a person who is not an Officer.
The Chief Electoral Officer shall be paid an honorarium of $150 for by-elections and $300 for regular elections adjusted for CPI as of 2024.
         3.  Tiebreaker
Prior to the beginning of the voting period, the Chief Electoral Officer will decide on a tie-breaker candidate in any contested election at their discretion. They will seal the results in an envelope to be signed and dated by the President and placed in a locker for which only the Chief Electoral Officer will have the combination.
         4.  Official Representatives and Volunteers
An election volunteer:
1. must be registered with the CEO;
2. can be any University of Ottawa student;
3. cannot serve on more than one candidate’s campaign in the same election;
4. are limited to posting on social media during the campaigning period; and
5. are subject to all campaigning rules and penalties as outlined below.
An official representative has all the same functions of an election volunteer, in addition to:
1. being able to help put posters up; and
2. being able to proxy class talks.
         1.  Candidate Nomination
Any Member who wishes to run must submit form E1 (Officer Nomination) by the date set by the Chief Electoral Officer. The nomination shall include 15 signatures of Members of the Society and a platform of less than 200 words per language written in English and French. A translator may be chosen at the candidate's discretion and is not considered an official representative or volunteer.
Platforms shall be included on the ballot. Before the voting period begins, an email shall be sent to all Members, listing all candidates and their respective platforms.
Any two (2) Members may submit a nomination to be Co-Presidents.
         2.  Candidates Meeting
A candidates' meeting will be held before the campaign period. All candidates must be present unless otherwise arranged with the chief electoral Officer. At this meeting, the chief electoral officer will outline the election rules and disclose all penalties associated with infractions of these rules.
         3.  Campaign Period
The campaign period shall last for at minimum seven (7) business days, including polling days. 
During this period, candidates are required to participate in an election debate between all positions and make at least four (4) class presentations in the language of their choice in engineering courses or courses with “engineering” in their title at the discretion of the Chief Electoral Officer. Candidates running for VP Communications and VP Francophone are required to conduct at least one of these presentations in each official language.
Form E2 (Class Presentation Confirmation) shall be submitted to the Chief Electoral Officer before the end of the campaign period as proof of completed class presentations.
Candidates are allowed to spend a maximum of $50 on posters, banners, or any other campaign-related expenditure. The Society shall cover the cost of posters printed using the Society’s printer, but this expense shall count toward the allowed expenditures described above. All campaign receipts must be submitted.
Physical promotion must follow the following rules:
1. no more than twenty-five (25) posters may be printed, and they may only be posted in SITE and CBY;
   1. posters must be approved by the CEO prior to posting;
   2. posters must be fully bilingual;
   3. physical posters must be stamped at the ESS office;
   4. all posters must be taken down after voting; and
   5. violation of the rules outlined above will result in a 5% penalty in votes.
Digital promotion must follow the following rules:
2. Social media posts are limited to Facebook, Instagram, and Discord;
   1. all posts must be open to the public;
   2. all posts must be bilingual;
   3. all posts on Facebook and Instagram must tag ESS;
   4. all posts must include the ESS logo;
   5. all posts must be sent to the CEO and approved prior to publication; and
   6. violation of the rules outlined above will result in a 5% penalty in votes.
In addition, a candidate will be disqualified if found guilty, at the discretion of the Chief Electoral Officer, of:
1. defamation; or
2. use of the Society, UOSU or other Recognized Student Government resource not available to every student; or
3. not submitting a completed nomination by the deadline set; or
4. not attending the candidates’ meeting without arrangement with the Chief Electoral Officer; or
5. candidate must not hold any position on the UOSU Executive or have an active nomination; or
6. slating; or
7. any other offence as specified by the Chief Electoral Officer.
In the event that a candidate is disqualified after submitting a complete nomination, the candidate must present themselves to the Board of Directors and, by resolution, be approved to run in any subsequent election of the Society. If a candidate in a contested election is disqualified after voting has begun:
1. and the winning candidate is disqualified, the Board of Directors shall appoint a Member of the Society to the vacant office until a By-Election is held;
2. in a three-way or more election, if a candidate is disqualified whose number of votes could have affected the outcome of the election, the Board of Directors will appoint a Member of the Society to the vacant office until a By-Election is held; and
3. in all other cases, the election results are upheld and shared.
A candidate may appeal any penalty or disqualification decision issued by the Chief Electoral Officer by submitting a formal appeal within 24 hours to the Board of Directors. If a candidate is dissatisfied with the Board’s decision, they may escalate the appeal to the UOSU Appeals Committee within 24 hours of the Board’s ruling. While an appeal is pending, the candidate shall remain on the ballot, but the election results shall not be ratified until a final ruling is issued.
         4.  Voting period
The voting period shall be a minimum of three (3) business days.
Candidates may continue campaigning throughout this period, which shall be considered an extension of the campaign period.
Voting shall take place via a secure, third-party online voting platform.
A preferential voting system shall be used when the number of candidates exceeds the number of available positions.
If the number of candidates is equal to or fewer than the available positions, a confidence voting system shall be used for each candidate.
         5.  By-Elections
All By-Elections shall be held between September 15 and March 30 within a period of 20 business days after an executive position becomes vacant. The By-Election shall be conducted with the same procedures as a regular Executive election. The executives, at their discretion, may appoint a Member to the executive position until a By-Election can be conducted in accordance with this policy.
         6. Election Results
The Chief Electoral Officer shall certify the election results and ensure they are submitted to the Chair of the Board. Within 72 hours of the end of the voting period, the provisional results shall be sent to all Members, clearly marked as subject to ratification by the Board of Directors. The Board shall ratify the final results, after which the certified results shall be distributed to all Members.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Daniel Thorp        Alae Boufarrachene        Domenick Mann        Eric Hagen
Hayley Jubinville        Sofia Ershova
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye        Daniel Thorp        Brooke MacQuarrie        Carolina González        Jad Mghabghab        Ethan Tang        Maya Benhamou
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Ashna ____        Magno _____        Daniel Thorp
________________
3. Manager Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the roles, responsibilities, and expectations of Managers elected to assist Executives in carrying out operational tasks.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all individuals elected or appointed as Managers.
   3. Policy
      1. Definition and Creation of Managers
A Manager of the Society shall be a Member appointed to assist an executive. To create a Manager position, a list of the Manager's responsibilities, including the executive to whom the Manager reports, shall be indicated.
      2. Eligibility
Any active Member of the Society may apply for a Manager position of the Society provided that the Member is in good standing with the faculty.
      3. Appointment
All Managers shall be elected by the Members at the Annual General Meeting for a term of May 1st to April 30., with the exception of the Manager of 101 week whose duration of their mandate is defined in section ‎f. If any Manager position should be or become vacant during this term, the Officers may appoint a Member to the Manager position after the vacant position has been advertised for a minimum of one (1) week.
      4. Roles of the Manager of Marketing
The Manager of Marketing of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Communications;
2. work to increase engagement from engineering students;
3. work to find additional advertisement streams for the Society to pursue;
4. conduct in-person marketing initiatives such as postering and tabling;
5. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
6. as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office.
      1. Roles of the Manager of Social Media
The Manager of Social Media of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Communications;
2. oversee the marketing committee;
3. generate promotional material for events and posts;
4. assist with the design of the handbook;
5. maintain the brand of the Society;
6. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
7. as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office.
      1. Roles of the Manager of Information Technology
The Manager of Information Technology (Manager of IT) of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Communications;
2. maintain and make recommendations on improving all servers, audio-visual equipment, inventory of technical equipment, websites, and other technologies of the Society and proper documentation thereof;
3. reset passwords of officer emails at the start of each term;
4. update the website with minutes of different meetings, reports to be posted, and the up-to-date budget;
5. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
6. as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office.
      1. Roles of the Manager of Sponsorship
The Manager of Sponsorship of the Society shall:
1. report to the VPFA;
2. oversee the position of ERTW Commissioner;
3. maintain an up-to-date sponsorship package and sponsorship spreadsheet;
4. reach out to companies in the hope of acquiring monetary or other gain;
5. host one (1) financial literacy and outreach event each Fall and Winter semester or organize the contracting of one;
6. give a monthly report to the VPFA on what progress has been made;
7. create and send the annual holiday thank you cards;
8. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
9. as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office.
      1. Roles of the Manager of Sports
The Manager of Sports of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP External;
2. coordinate inter-university sporting activities, including but not limited to Eng Hockey and Eng Rugby;
3. coordinate co-ed intramural sports, including esports, for Engineers;
4. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
5. as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office.
      1. Roles of the Manager of Translations
The Manager of Translations of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Francophone;
2. assist in overseeing the French Translation and Content Supervisory Committee;
3. be bilingual in French and English;
4. be responsible for translating all Society documents and announcements within a reasonable time frame, including:
   1. minutes from Board of Directors meetings to be posted on the website before the next Board of Directors meeting;
   2. minutes from the Annual General Meeting to be posted on the website before 101 Week;
   3. the constitution to be posted on the website by the end of their term; and
   4. any other information requested to be translated by officers.
5. report mistranslations to the VP Communications as necessary;
6. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in the fall and winter semesters; and
7. as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office.
         1. Eligibility of the Manager of Translations
1. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy.
      1. Roles of the Manager of Student Advocacy
The Manager of Student Success of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Academic and VP External;
2. aid in addressing academic issues facing engineering students;
3. help VP Academic with the Academic report and share with VP External;
4. help VP Equity with the Equity report and share with VP External;
5. help improve, promote and keep track of educational resources and scholarships offered within the faculty and university;
6. advocate for student success;
7. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
8. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Manager of External Awareness
The Manager of External Awareness of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP External;
2. support VP External with any take-backs;
3. promote ESSCO and CFES within uOttawa;
4. host at least one (1) external awareness event each Fall and Winter semester;
5. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
6. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Wine and Cheese Coordinator
The Manager of Wine and Cheese of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Academic; and
2. help to plan and run one (1) Wine and Cheese in both the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the 101 Week Coordinator
The 101 Week Coordinator of the Society shall:
1. form and lead the 101 Week Committee;
2. hold office until the conclusion of 101 Week;
3. report to the VP Social with 101 Week related events throughout the summer;
   1. assist the VP Philanthropic with the organization of the philanthropic event during 101 Week;
4. assist in the coordination of 101 Week events throughout the week; and
5. reside in Ottawa during the summer.
   1. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Daniel Thorp        Jason Gonzales        Sofia Ershova
Dakota Squires
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
________________
________________
4. Coordinator Policy
   1. Purpose
The Coordinator Policy shall outline the responsibilities and structure of Coordinator roles within the Society, which are designed to support time-bound or event-specific mandates.
   2. Scope
This policy shall apply to all Coordinators appointed to organize specific events, projects, or services under the supervision of a designated Executive.
   3. Policy
      1. Appointment
Coordinators shall be appointed by the Officers of the Society, upon recommendation by the relevant Executive.
      2. Eligibility
Any active Member of the Society may become a Coordinator provided that the Member is in good standing with the faculty.
      3. Term
Coordinators shall serve for the duration of the event, project, or term as outlined in their mandate, or until they are otherwise removed or replaced by the Officers.
      4. Roles of the 101 Week Coordinator
The 101 Week Coordinator of the Society shall:
1. form and lead the 101 Week Committee;
2. hold office until the conclusion of 101 Week;
3. report to the VP Social with 101 Week related events throughout the summer;
   1. assist the VP Philanthropic with the organization of the philanthropic event during 101 Week;
4. assist in the coordination of 101 Week events throughout the week.
         1. Eligibility of the 101 Week Coordinator
To be appointed as 101 Week Coordinator, an active Member must:
1. reside in Ottawa during the summer.
      1. Roles of the Wine and Cheese Coordinator
The Wine and Cheese Coordinator of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP Academic; and
2. help to plan and run one (1) Wine and Cheese in both the Fall and Winter semesters.
   1. Effective Date
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on March 29, 2026.
______
________________
5. Commissioner Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the roles and responsibilities of Commissioners and the procedures for their appointment by the Society.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all individuals appointed as Commissioners by the Officers of the Society.
   3. Policy
      1. Appointment
All commissioners shall be appointed by the officer holding the position they report to. To create a Commissioner position, a list of the Commissioner’s responsibilities, including the officer to whom the Commissioner reports, shall be indicated.
      2. Eligibility
Any active Member of the Society may apply for a Commissioner position of the Society provided that the Member is in good standing with the faculty.
      3. Roles of the Charity Commissioner
The Charity Commissioner shall:
1. report to the VP Philanthropic;
2. aid in the planning and execution of all philanthropic events held by the society; and
3. help lead the Charity Committee.
      1. Roles of the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner
The University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner (uOEC Commissioner) shall:
4. report to the VP Internal; and
5. form and lead the uOEC Committee, whose purpose is to plan and run this competition in the fall semester.
      1. Roles of the ERTW Commissioner
The ERTW Commissioner shall:
1. report to the Manager of Sponsorships; and
2. seek business ties with retailers to expand partnerships for the ERTW sticker.
      1. Accountability Officer
The Accountability Officer, shall:
1. report to the VP Equity;
2. provide context to decisions taken by the previous ESS executive and act as an advisor to the sitting executive; and
3. oversee the team and act as an unbiased mediator in all ESS-related matters or internal conflicts.
         1. Eligibility for Accountability Officer, 
To run for Accountability Officer, , an active Member must:
1. have been an executive in the previous year.
   1. If the directorship of the Accountability Officer,  cannot be filled by an immediate previous executive, the sitting executive may appoint any previous executive member.
      1. Roles of the Commissioner of Finance
The Commissioner of Finance of the Society shall:
1. report to the VP of Finance and Administration;
2. complete UOSU audit training;
3. assist with organizing reimbursements;
4. assist with audits;
5. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and
6. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.
      1. Roles of the Selection Commissioner
1. report to the VP External Affairs; and
2. lead the Selection Committee, whose purpose is to select all delegates to attend all applicable conferences.
      1. Roles of the Commissioner of Francophone Outreach
The Commissioner of Francophone Outreach of the Society shall: 
1. report to the VP Francophone; 
2. support the VP Francophone in all scheduled events and initiatives including but not limited to planning, hosting, procuring and making promotional content;
3. represent the interests of francophone engineering students;
4. work to ensure the active participation of Francophone students in ESS events, services and policies;
5. unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in fall and winter semesters; 
6. and unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 
         1. Eligibility of the Commissioner of Francophone Outreach
1. Self-identify as a Francophone student;
2. Apply in French;
   1. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on April 7, 2024.
Mackenzie Conrad        Jason Gonzalez        Daniel Thorp
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Cyrus Choi
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
______________
________________
6. Committee Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the responsibilities and structure of Committees established by the Society to support designated mandates.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all Members appointed to serve on Committees.
   3. Policy
      1. Selection Committee
The Selection Committee (SC) shall:
1. operate under the purview of the VP External.
2. be chaired by the Selection Commissioner, who shall;
   1. only have voting rights in the event of a tie;
3. consist of a minimum of three (3) active Members selected by the VP External Affairs, none of which have applied for said delegation; and the VP External Affairs, who shall have voting rights;
4. vote on candidates via anonymous ranked ballot;
5. provide feedback about a candidate's performance on the application process if requested by the candidate within fourteen (14) days of receiving the final decision from the SC; and
6. consider all applicants equally regardless of experience.
      1. Graphic Design Committee
The Graphic Design Committee shall:
1. report directly to the VP Services;
2. provide designs and artwork as requested by Officers;
   1. given an adequate time frame.
3. help the VP Services to design merch; and
4. help make graphics for social media if needed.
      1. University of Ottawa Engineering Competition (uOEC) Committee
The uOEC Committee shall:
1. report directly to the VP Internal and uOEC Commissioner;
2. plan and run uOEC; and
3. be made up of but is not limited to, the following teams:
   1. logistics;
   2. merchandise; and
   3. competitions.
      1. Marketing Committee
The Marketing Committee shall:
1. report to the Managers of Social Media and Marketing; and
2. work to increase engagement from engineering students.
      1. 101 Week Committee
The 101 Week Committee shall:
1. report to the VP Social and the manager of 101 Week; and
2. help plan and execute 101 Week.
   1. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Eric Hagen
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
________________
________________
7. Sub-Association Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the shared responsibilities, governance standards, and funding criteria between the Engineering Student Society (ESS) and its recognized Sub-Associations. It promotes transparency, accountability, and alignment with ESS values, while ensuring fair representation and consistent operations on both sides.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all associations that have been formally granted Sub-Association status by the Society. It governs their internal operations, compliance obligations, access to funding, and representation within the Society.
   3. Definitions
For the purposes of this policy:
1. “Appeal” means a request submitted by a Sub-Association to the Board for reconsideration of an Assessment, in accordance with Section 6.7.
2. “Assessment” means the written determination made under Schedule B evaluating the overall compliance of a Sub-Association with the requirements in Section 6.6.
3. “Disbursement” means the transfer of funds from the Society to a Sub-Association. 
4. “Executive” means an individual who holds a Vice-President or Officer Position within a Sub-Association and exercises decision-making authority on its behalf.
5. “Member” means an individual who meets the membership criteria of a Sub-Association, as defined in its constitution.
6. “Sub-Association” means a student organization recognized by the Society, as set out in Schedule A. Also known as Member Associations by the UOSU. 
7. “Program Modifier” is a value between 0 and 1 that depicts the percentage of funds allocated from a program to a sub-association as outlined in Schedule A. 
Terms not defined in this policy shall have the meaning assigned to them in the By-Laws.
   4. Directors
Each Sub-Association shall be represented by up to two (2) Directors that share one (1) vote at the Society’s Board of Directors at the Society Board of Directors, who must be:
1. Elected at a General Meeting; or
2. Assigned ex officio in the Sub-Association’s constitution.
In the event of a vacancy, the Board may appoint a Director in a program represented by the Sub-Association to serve until the Sub-Association fills the position. However, such an appointment shall not absolve the Sub-Association of its responsibility to designate Sub-Association Directors in accordance with this policy.
   5. Funding
1. Each semester, the Society shall allocate to Sub-Associations a Disbursement equal to 15% of the operating grant received from the UOSU. These funds are exclusively for Sub-Association use and shall not, under any circumstances, be used for the Society’s own operations or expenses.
2. The total amount shall be distributed proportionally based on student representation and adjusted according to the Assessment of the preceding semester to be done as outlined in Schedule B.
3. The Disbursement for each represented program shall be calculated as:
(UOSU Operating Grant Value Per Student × 15%) × (Number of students enrolled in the program) × (Program Modifier from Schedule A)
4. For each disbursement, the Vice-President of Internal Affairs shall issue a written notice to the Sub-Association specifying:
   1. The total amount disbursed;
   2. The number of students and calculation used; and
   3. The assessment of the preceding semester in accordance with the framework outlined in Schedule B. 
5. If funds were disbursed in error or in excess, the overpayment shall be returned or deducted from future disbursements without interest.
      1. Delays
1. A Disbursement shall be considered delayed if the Society fails to issue it within thirty (30) days of receiving its semesterly operating grant from the UOSU.
      1. Remaining Funds
1. Funds shall be considered remaining if they were withheld from a Sub-Association, and either:
   1. The Appeal submission period has expired without an Appeal; or
   2. All Appeals have been resolved;
2. Remaining funds shall be held by the Society and may not be used for the operations or expenses of the Society, under any circumstance.
   1. All funds shall be granted back to the Sub-Association once compliance has been reached.
      1. Advances
Sub-Associations may request an advance of funds to cover urgent or time-sensitive expenses:
1. Requests must include a written justification, explaining what the advance is for and why the funds are needed before the next Disbursement.
2. Advances may be approved by the Officers, provided sufficient funds are available in the Society’s operating accounts. The Officers are under no obligation to approve an advance but shall consider all requests in good faith.
3. Repayment may be made directly or shall otherwise be deducted from future Disbursements. All advances remain due until repaid in full.
4. Sub-Associations may only request an advance of up to two (2) semesters of expected Disbursements.
   1. Any amount beyond this limit shall require authorization by the Board through a separate written loan agreement not governed by this policy.
5. The Vice-President of Internal Affairs shall report all approved advances to the Board at its next regular meeting, specifying the justification, approved amount, and source of funds.
   1. Compliance
Each Sub-Association must comply with the following requirements:
      2. Governance
1. Maintain a governing constitution that defines the structure, responsibilities, and procedures of the Sub-Association.
   1. It must include a fair and transparent process for the removal of Executives and Members.
   2. The constitution may not be suspended and may only be amended by resolution at a General Meeting.
   3. The Sub-Association shall at all times comply with its constitution and the by-laws and policies of the Society.
2. Define Members as all undergraduate students in the programs represented by the Sub-Association.
   1. Additional categories of Members may be defined in the Sub-Association’s constitution.
3. Ensure that all public-facing content solely created by the Sub-Association, and General Meetings, are available in both English and French.
4. Designate its Directors in accordance with Section 6.4 and provide written notice of their designation to the Chair of the Board.
   1. Ensure that at least one Director attends or sends a proxy to Board meetings each semester and provides updates on the Sub-Association’s activities and operations.
5. Publish on its website: 
   1. The current version of its constitution in both English and French, with any amendments published within six (6) months. 
   2. Minutes of Executive and General Meetings, excluding any confidential portions of the meeting. No votes may be conducted during such portions. 
   3. Annual Budget.
6. Provide the Vice-President of Internal Affairs with the names and email addresses of all current Executives
   1. Designate at least two (2) Executives as signing officers by May 30th of each year, for submission to uOttawa Conventions & Reservations.
      1. Elections
1. Executives must be elected through a vote open exclusively to all Members.
2. General Elections for all Executive positions, excluding first year positions, shall be held during the Winter semester.
   1. Elections for first-year representatives may be held during the Fall semester. 
   2. Vacant Executive positions may be filled via by-election.
3. Elections may be conducted at a General Meeting or by online ballot.
   1. If held online, they must be administered by an impartial elections officer, and the results must be ratified at a General Meeting.
4. Executive, Director, and other leadership positions may be held by any student eligible under the sub-association’s constitution, provided they serve the members of the sub-association. 
5. Submit to the Society, within thirty (30) days of the end of an election, a list of all individuals who voted for the purpose of verifying their status as students at the University of Ottawa.
      1. Meetings
1. Hold at least one Executive meeting per calendar month during the Fall and Winter semesters.
2. Hold at least one General Meeting in each of the Fall and Winter semesters.
3. Ensure all General Meetings:
   1. Are open to all Members.
   2. Provide Members an opportunity to submit motions or proposals for inclusion in the agenda;
   3. Are publicized at least seven (7) days in advance to all Members. 
      1. The date, time, location, and
      2. If prepared, the agenda, including the text of any proposed constitutional amendments.
      3. Notice must also be sent to the Vice-President of Internal Affairs.
      2. Financials
1. Prepare and publish an annual budget:
   1. A provisional budget with limited detail may be used until a finalized budget is approved and published by November 1.
   2. It must include all projected revenues and expenses.
   3. It must be approved by the Executive before any spending occurs.
   4. Amendments must be approved by the Executive and published within one (1) month of adoption.
2. Publish actual financial results for each semester, including revenues and expenses compared to the approved budget. 
3. Submit an annual audit to the Vice-President of Finance and Administration (VPFA) for review by November 1st, including: 
   1. A signed audit submission letter;
   2. Monthly bank statements;
   3. Receipts and invoices for all expenses;
   4. A statement of operations (total revenues and expenses);
   5. If applicable:
      1. A petty cash log;
      2. A log of off-bank transactions;
         1. This includes all transactions made on behalf of the Sub-Association, such as EEF paying for something on behalf  of the Sub-Association directly. 
      3. Receipts for all issued cheques.
   2. Services
The Society shall provide the following to Sub-Associations:
1. Access to equipment rentals, in accordance with the Equipment Rentals Policy.
2. A list of all students represented by the Sub-Association shall be provided each academic semester.
   1. This list shall include but is not limited to names, email addresses, student numbers, language of correspondence, and program of study.
   2. A confidentiality agreement must first be signed by each Executive who will access the list, and only those who have signed may be granted access.
   3. The list shall be provided within fourteen (14) days of the Society receiving the list from the UOSU.
3. The Society may submit a list of Sub-Associations by April 30th to the UOSU.
   1. By virtue of the Society’s status as a Recognized Student Government under the UOSU, such Sub-Associations shall be considered a recognized student association.
   2. The Society shall request to the UOSU that Virtual Event Management System (VEMS) credentials be issued by uOttawa Conventions & Reservations to each Sub-Association.


   3. Records
All Disbursement notices, Assessments, and any Board resolutions relating to Sub-Associations, or amendments to this policy shall be retained by the Society for at least seven (7) years and made available upon request to any Sub-Association.
   4. Insurance
For internal and external events, the sub-associations have insurance coverage as entities under the ESS organization




   5. Effective Date
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Domenick Mann
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye        Daniel Thorp        Justin Beal
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Farah El Siss        Steffen Zylstra    Daniel Thorp    Jad ____  
   6. Schedule A – Recognized Sub-Associations
This Schedule reflects Sub-Association status granted in accordance with Section 8 of the By-Laws. It shall be automatically updated by the Chair or Secretaries of the Board to reflect any decision of the Society.
Acronym
	Name
	Programs Represented (Program Modifier)
	IEEE
	Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
	* Electrical Engineering (100%)
* Computer Engineering (100%)
* Software Engineering (100%)
* Multidisciplinary Design (100%)
* Chemical Engineering and Computing Technology (20%)
* Mechanical Engineering and Computing Technology (20%)
* Biomedical Mechanical Engineering and Computing Technology (20%)
* Civil Engineering and Computing Technology (20%)
* Electrical Engineering and Physics (50%) 
	ChESS
	Chemical Engineering Students' Society
	* Chemical Engineering (100%)
* Chemical Engineering and Computing Technology (80%)
* Biochemistry and Chemical Engineering (50%) 
	MESS
	Mechanical Engineering Students' Society 
	* Mechanical Engineering (100%)
* Mechanical Engineering and Computing Technology (80%)
* Biomedical Mechanical Engineering (100%)
* Biomedical Mechanical Engineering and Computing Technology (80%)
	CESA
	Civil Engineering Students' Association
	* Civil Engineering (100%)
* Civil Engineering and Computing Technology (80%)
	   7. Schedule B – Assessment Framework
This framework outlines how sub-association compliance is assessed to determine funding disbursements. It ensures transparency, fairness, accountability, and consistent expectations.
      3. Assessment Process Order 
1. Initial Draft: 
The VP Internal, with input from the VP Finance and ESS President(s), creates a draft compliance assessment for each sub-association within thirty (30) days of the start of each semester. 
2. Collaboration with Sub-Association: 
The VP Internal reaches out to the sub-association at least one month before the next Board of Directors (BOD) meeting to collaborate and give time for the sub-association to resolve any compliance issues.
3. Board Feedback: 
The draft assessment is presented to the Board for review. The Board gives feedback on:
* The compliance category the sub-association falls into
* Disbursement percentages or penalties
4. Final Approval: 
After edits based on the Board input, the VP Internal motions for the assessment’s approval at the next BOD meeting.
      4. Compliance Categories
Each assessment assigns the Sub-Association to one of the following categories based on the total percentage of deliverables completed:
1. Compliant (100%): All deliverables met. Full disbursement issued.
2. Partially Compliant (50-95%): Some deliverables are missing, but efforts have been made. Partial funding issued. Disbursement is reduced by 5% per missing deliverable from the list in section 6.1.3. 
3. Non-Compliant (0%): Financial audit was not sent to the VP Finance & Administration, and the Sub-Association has been inactive or unresponsive. No disbursement is issued. 
The percentages above reflect the range of semester funding that may be disbursed based on the assigned category.
      5. Compliance Deliverables Summary 
Sub-Association compliance is evaluated on a 100-point scale.
1. 50% comes from Financial Deliverables submitted to the VPFA
2. 50% comes from General Governance Deliverables
         1.  Financial Deliverables to the VP Finance & Administration (VPFA): ( 50%)
All items below are mandatory. If any single item is missing, the entire 50% is forfeited. 
1. Due November 1st is the Annual Audit that includes the following: 
   1. Signed Audit letter
   2. Monthly bank statements for the full year 
   3. Receipts and Invoices for all expenses 
   4. Statement of operations (revenues/expenses)
   5. If applicable:
      1. A petty cash log;
      2. Receipts for all issued cheques;
      3. A log of off-bank transactions. 
         1.  Governance Deliverables: ( 50%)
Each item is worth 5% of the total assessment:
1. (5%) Maintain and publish a bilingual constitution on their website.
2. (5%) Hold at least one General Meeting per academic year. 
3. (5%) Hold General Elections annually as per their constitution. 
4. (5%) Advertising available positions and their respective mandates at least seven days in advance of elections.
5. (5%) Publicize General Meetings 7 days in advance and allow motions from members. 
6. (5%) Publish meeting minutes and annual budget on their website.
7. (5%) Publish actual financial results for each semester.
8. (5%) Submit a full list of executives with contact info to the VP Internal.
9. (5%) Designate two signing officers by May 30.
10. (5%) Ensure representation at each Board meeting by appointing a director through the process of this policy. 
11. (5%) Submit a list of non-program voters within 30 days of the election end date. 
Each item not completed results in a 5% deduction from the semester’s total possible disbursement.
      6. Assessment Format
Each assessment must be shared in writing with both the Sub-Association and Board at least one month before the Board meeting, and must include:
1. Assigned compliance category and disbursement percentage
2. Summary of findings and relevant context
3. Rationale and evidence
4. Evidence of warnings and reachouts to the sub-association, VP Finance and ESS President(s) inputs, and acknowledgment of receiving these from the sub-association ( at least 1 month prior )  
5. Suggested next steps for the sub-association to take to reach full compliance.
Note: Each assessment is valid for one semester only. If a Sub-Association is later deemed fully compliant, it may be reassessed and recover all  missing disbursement from all previous semesters. 
      7. Appeals
A Sub-Association may submit an Appeal to the Board requesting reconsideration of an Assessment within one (1) month of its issuance.
1. The Board may, by resolution, revise or direct the revision of any Assessment.
2. Appeals should be resolved within one (1) month of being issued officially at a board meeting,  where reasonably possible.
3. No Assessment shall be finalized while an Appeal is pending.


8. Removal from Office Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the procedures and grounds for the removal of individuals from positions of responsibility within the Society, in order to uphold accountability, integrity, and a safe organizational environment.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all individuals serving as Officers or Directors of the Society.
   3. Policy
      1. Impeachment
Any member may be impeached on any of the following grounds:
1. repeated infractions against the Inclusivity Policy;
2. failure to follow the regulations of the Constitution without just cause;
3. mismanagement of funds;
4. failure to comply with Canadian law or Ontario provincial law;
5. abuse of power: and
6. placing the ESS at risk.
An impeachment shall be completed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of those present at a Board of Directors meeting. Any motion to impeach must specify the grounds for such impeachment and the specific events justifying the motion while maintaining sensitive confidentiality.
The member being impeached must be notified of such a motion no less than five (5) days before such a motion is presented.
If an impeachment motion is passed, the member impeached will be removed from office.
Any member impeached through the Board will be forbidden from holding any of the following positions:
1. ESS Executive;
2. Board Member;
3. ESS Manager;
4. ESS Commissioner;
5. ESS Committee Member;
6. Sub-association Member; or
7. 101 Week Guide.
The Member will still be permitted to vote at General Meetings, Assemblies, referendums, and elections, so long as they remain members of the ESS.
      2. Resignation
Any member of the Executive Committee may leave office by addressing a letter of resignation to the President.
In the case of the president's resignation, the letter should be addressed to the VP Internal.
The resignation of a member takes effect two weeks upon receipt of such a letter. In this two-week period, the member resigning must work on a transition report for the elected official who will take their place.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on April 7, 2024.
Mackenzie Conrad        Maya Benhamou        Katelyn Renaud
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Daniel Thorp
________________
9. Financial Controls Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the financial controls and procedures governing the use of Society funds, in order to ensure accountability, transparency, and proper stewardship of resources.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all Officers, Directors, and individuals authorized to handle or oversee the Society’s financial transactions.
   3. Policy
      1. Signing Authority
All cheques or any other transfer of funds of the Society shall be approved by any two of the:
1. President;
2. Vice President of Financial Affairs; and
3. Vice President of Social Affairs.
      1. Budget
Any Officer may request funds for an event, service or any other project by completing Form F2 (Budget Line Request) and submitting it to the senior Vice President of Financial Affairs. A complete budget detailing the fiscal plans for the year must be assembled by the VPFA, and presented for approval by the Board of Directors before 101 week. All budget lines must be approved to the extent that:
1. the net gain or loss shall be considered the approved amount;
2. any net loss less than $300 shall be approved by the Officers of the Society;
3. any net loss equal to or greater than $300 shall be approved by the Board of Directors of the Society;
4. spring and summer expenses shall be approved by the Officers and ratified by the Board of Directors at the next meeting of the Board; and
5. if a net loss requiring approval from the Board of Directors cannot be approved in a reasonable amount of time, the Officers can approve the expense, and it shall be ratified at the next meeting of the Board.
      1. Expense Reimbursement
Any Member seeking reimbursement of approved expenses shall complete form F1 (Expense Report) and submit it along with the original receipt of the expense to the Vice President of Financial Affairs for approval. If an approved budget line for the expense exists, a reimbursement shall be issued for no more than approved. Any expenditures not approved shall be owed back to the Society from the Member who made the expense.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye        Daniel Thorp        Cyrus Choi        Maya Benhamou        Eric Hagen
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Daniel Thorp
________________
10. Transition policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the responsibilities and procedures for outgoing Officers and Directors to ensure an effective and accountable transition of institutional knowledge and duties.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all individuals serving in elected or appointed leadership positions within the Society who are expected to transition their role to a successor.
   3. Policy
      1. Creation of a Position Handbook
To ensure the best chance of success for the Society, we must denote our best practices. Thus, in the month leading to the end of a Members term, they will update the handbook relating to their position with information regarding:
1. persons of interest and contact information;
2. events and their outcome;
3. general practices; and
4. other information relevant to their position.
      1. Access to Handbook
The handbook will be kept as a digital document and only accessible by the Member elected or appointed to that position.
      2. Transition Meeting
In addition to the handbook, the outgoing and incoming officers will have a one-on-one meeting to discuss its contents.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Domenick Mann        Maya Benhamou
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Daniel Thorp
________________
11. Locker Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the procedures, responsibilities, and rules governing the rental and use of Society-owned lockers.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all Members of the Society and any other university students authorized to use the Society’s locker rental services.
   3. Policy
      1. Rental Duration and Fees
The locker rental period is semesterly or yearly and ends the last day before the next semester begins. The cost of rental is to be at least $1 unless otherwise directed by the Board of Directors. Fees will be waived for current and past ESS Executives for the duration of their undergraduate degree. Upon purchasing the locker, students must identify themselves by student card.
      2. Liability
The Society will not provide a security lock. It is the sole responsibility of the renter to provide a security lock. The Society will not be responsible for the loss or damage of the renters’ goods under any condition.
      3. Renewal
The renewal period is within the first month of the new semester. The Society will post an official deadline at a minimum of two (2) weeks in advance. Failure to renew will result in the loss of the renters’ personal lock and locker. Lockers not renewed must be vacated by the last day of the renewal period. Items left in the locker will be recoverable for a fee of $5 for a period of one (1) month after the last day of the renewal period. Claims for items must be made in person at the Society’s office. Items left for longer than a month will be disposed of at the discretion of the VP Services.
      4. Transfer
The Society reserves the right to transfer lockers at any time upon one (1) weeks’ notice.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Daniel Thorp
________________
12. Equipment Rental Policy
   1. Purpose
This policy outlines the rules, procedures, and responsibilities related to the rental and use of equipment owned by the Society.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all Members of the Society and any individuals authorized to rent its equipment.
   3. Policy
      1. Use
Equipment rental shall be prioritized to Sub-Associations, engineering clubs, and other Recognized Student Governments, and any other association or individuals may be approved at the discretion of the VP Services. Before equipment can be rented, the renter shall sign a rental contract in accordance with this policy. The contract should specify a date by which damage fees should be paid.
      2. Fees
All fees associated with equipment rental shall be determined by the VP Services. A complete list of all available items and their daily rental fee shall be maintained and made available on the website of the Society. Sub-associations and clubs shall be able to rent the equipment at no cost. Other Recognized Student Governments shall receive a 25% discount on all rental fees. All fees will be proposed by the VP Services and approved by the Board.
      3. Damage
The renter assumes all risk of loss or damage to the equipment from any cause and shall agree to return it to the Society in the condition received from the Society, with the exception of normal wear and tear. The VP Services will determine normal wear and tear. All determinations made by the VP Services are final.
   4. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Aiden McCooeye
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Daniel Thorp
________________
13. Inclusivity Policy
   1. Purpose
All Members of the Engineering Students’ Association are expected to respect and uphold the rights of other Members and the public. Every Member of the ESS has the right to freedom from harassment and discrimination, and the right to participate in Society activities without judgment. This policy establishes standards and expectations to promote inclusivity, equity, and safety at all Society-affiliated events, activities, and spaces. This policy shall also outline responsibilities for Members to ensure ESS remains inclusive and instances of harassment are not ignored.
This policy aligns with the Ontario Humans Rights Code.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all Members of the Society, including all Officers and Board Members. This policy applies to all aspects of the Society, including events, initiatives, recruitment, promotion, goods & services, interactions with the public, and physical/virtual spaces under the authority of the Society, as well as conduct outside of these contexts that has a material impact on the safety, inclusivity, or participation of Members.
   3. Definitions
1. “Discrimination” refers to when someone is treated unfavourably due to aspects including but not limited to their:
   1. Race
   2. Skin Colour
   3. Sex
   4. Sexual Orientation
   5. Gender Identity
   6. Gender Expression
   7. Disability
   8. Age
   9. Citizenship
   10. Language
   11. Family Status
   12. Religion
   13. Creed
   14. Criminal Record
   15. Financial Status 
2. “Harassment” is when comments and actions are taken against an individual that are discriminatory as well as actions that are known, or could be reasonably inferred to be unwelcome. It does not matter whether the harasser intended to offend the recipient of the comments or actions. Actions that constitute harassment include but are not limited to:
   1. Written or verbal insults, abuse or threats;
   2. Discriminatory/derogatory nicknames or slurs;
   3. Unwelcome jokes or pranks;
   4. Comments, behaviour, or signage that seek to exclude, or that may make an individual/group feel unwelcome on the biases of the characteristics described in the definition of discrimination;
   5. Failure to use an individual's preferred pronouns;
   6. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favours, unwanted physical contact, or other conduct of a sexual nature;
   7. Words or actions that are violent or promote rape culture;
   8. Using positions of power or authority to control, influence, threaten, or otherwise interfere with another person. This does not include managerial responsibilities or disciplinary actions outlined in policy;
   9. Psychological abuse such as sustained and targeted badgering, persistent and unwanted communication or conduct that reasonably interferes with an individual’s participation or well-being, and following/stalking. 
   4. Policy
      1. ESS Accountability
         1. The ESS will promote a safe and inclusive environment for all Members of the Society, free from harassment and discrimination. 
         2. Any words, actions, or conduct that fall under the definition of discrimination or harassment will not be tolerated. 
         3. If any Member is found to have engaged in discriminatory behaviour or to have committed harassment, both at ESS events or outside the Society, they will be subject to disciplinary action.
         4. Officers of ESS are responsible for ensuring that harassment and discrimination are not tolerated, condoned, or ignored at all Society events, initiatives, and physical or virtual spaces under the authority of the Society. This includes ensuring that proper disciplinary procedures occur in a timely manner, and that they will not act as bystanders when witnessing actions that can be perceived as discriminatory.
      2. Complaint Handling Process
         1.  Complaint Submission
If an individual has a complaint or concern regarding a possible failure to uphold section 13.4.1, they may choose to address this complaint in the following ways:
1. Dealing directly with the concerned party if they are comfortable doing so;
2. Requesting informal action be taken by an Officer or third party;
3. Filing a Formal Complaint to the VP Equity, or in the case of conflicts of interest, a neutral Officer of the Society. ;
4. Seeking external assistance through UOSU, the faculty, or legal counsel.
If a complaint is filed, the subject of the complaint has the right to be notified of the complaint’s existence, the contents of the complaint, and possible discipline that may stem from the complaint, within five (5) business days.
A Formal Complaint should contain the following fields:
1. Name of the Reporting Individual
2. Name(s) of the Individual(s) involved in the incident
3. Incident Date and Time
4. Incident description and details
5. Incident Witness(es), if available
6. Contact Information (Optional)
         1.  Complaint Investigation
Once a Formal Complaint has been submitted to the Society, a thorough investigation will take place to ensure all information and circumstances are considered fairly. 
Investigations will be completed in an efficient and timely manner by the Investigator (VP Equity, or in the case of conflicts of interest, a neutral Officer of the Society).
Confidential interviews will be conducted with all relevant parties to document information, details, and statements. All documents and identifying information will be kept confidential and only available to the Investigator. The investigation findings will then be documented and presented to the Board. These investigative findings will omit the identities and all personal information regarding the individuals involved in an effort to maintain the confidentiality of the individuals.
If the complaint is found to be supported, disciplinary action outlined in section 13.4.3 should be taken. If the complaint is unsupported, further proceedings regarding the complaint should cease.
      3. Discipline
         1. If an individual is found not to adhere to section ‎13.4.1, appropriate consequences will be taken against them. 
         2. The determination of appropriate consequences must take into account the nature of the offence, severity of the offence, and the number of past offences that the individual has committed. 
         3. Decisions of discipline must be reasonable and fair, and take into account all information, evidence, and circumstances found through the investigation process. 
         4. Possible disciplinary actions and actionable items that may result from investigation include:
1. An apology,
2. Education on harassment and discrimination, performed by and elected Member,
3. Attendance to an anti-oppression workshop,
4. Access barred from all subsequent ESS events,
5. Suspension of Membership,
6. Revocation of Membership,
7. Review of this policy and other existing policies & procedures.
         1. The outcome of disciplinary action will be communicated to the complainant and subject of the complaint in writing. 
         2. Should the individual continue to disregard section 13.4.1, a special meeting of the Board of Directors will be called to discuss the situation and decide what further action should be taken.
         3. An individual may reverse disciplinary measures if they attend an anti-oppression workshop and make a presentation to the Board about what they’ve learned. The Board will then reevaluate the disciplinary action.
         4. If an individual wishes to challenge a disciplinary action that was taken, or has a complaint regarding the conduct of the investigation, they may make an appeal to the Board.
      4. Exemptions
1. Any formal incident report made by the faculty or a conference board will cause suspension of Membership with an option to appeal..
2. Any form of harassment that is physical or sexual in nature will cause access to be barred from all subsequent ESS events, and revocation of Membership, with an option to appeal. 
      1. Confidentiality
ESS is responsible for ensuring that complaints and disciplinary actions are handled in a manner that maintains the maximum possible confidentiality of the events and individuals involved. If a formal complaint has been filed, all documents and details of the investigation will be kept confidential and only accessible to the Investigator. When the findings of the investigation are presented to the board, all personal details including names will be omitted in an effort to maintain the confidentiality of the individuals.
   5. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016.
Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016.
Nicholas Burgel
Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017
Chloe Hayes
Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019.
Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019.
Barber, Devon                Davies, Travis                Maloney, Liam                Roche, Liam
Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021
Scott Fulton        Alexis McCreath-Frangakis        Liam Roche        Julian Ward        Reese Wunsche
Antonia Zupu
Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024
Mackenzie Conrad        Katelyn Renaud
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025.
Daniel Thorp        Cyrus Choi        Maya Benhamou        Eric Hagen
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Brooke MacQuarrie    Farah El Siss 
________________
14. Procurement Policy
   1. Purpose
The Procurement Policy establishes procedures for the acquisition of goods and services by the Society to ensure that all purchases are conducted ethically, transparently, and efficiently, while maintaining financial accountability and fairness.
   2. Scope
This policy applies to all Officers, Directors, committee members, and any individuals authorized to make or oversee purchases on behalf of the Society, including goods, services, rentals, leases, subscriptions, and contractual commitments.
All procurement activities must comply with the Financial Controls Policy and align with the approved budget.
   3. Policy
      1. Translation Verification
For any procurement involving text content:
1. Either the Vice-president of Francophone Affairs or the Manager of Translations must verify and approve the text before an order is placed. 
2. If no answer is given by the Vice-president of Francophone Affairs and/or the Manager of Translations within 48h of being notified, an additional window of 24 hours will be provided to the Vice-president of Communications to verify and approve the text before an order is placed.
3. Orders containing bilingual text must be reviewed by two (2) individuals at the time of submission to minimize the risk of typographical errors.
4. If a typographical or translation error is identified after an order has been placed, it must be disclosed within 48 hours of recognition, and corrective actions (such as returns, replacements, or discounts) must be taken.
      1. Vendor Selection
Vendors shall be selected based on price, quality, reliability, and ethical business practices.
Where feasible, preference shall be given to local, ethical, and sustainable vendors, provided they meet the required quality and cost standards.
      2. Conflict of Interest
Any Officer, Director, or Committee Member involved in procurement must declare any conflicts of interest before engaging in a purchasing decision.
Members shall not personally benefit from the Society’s procurement activities.
Accepting gifts, hospitality, or favors from vendors is strictly prohibited.
      3. Financial Oversight
All purchases must be documented and recorded for transparency and accountability.
Invoices, receipts, and quotes must be retained for auditing and reference purposes.
The Board of Directors shall review procurement records periodically to ensure policy compliance.
   4. Compliance
Any procurement decision not in compliance with this policy shall be subject to review and corrective action by the Board of Directors.
Violations of this policy, including failure to disclose conflicts of interest or financial mismanagement, may result in disciplinary action as determined by the Board.
   5. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by resolution on the 22nd day of February, 2025 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 9th day of March, 2025.
Dated the 9th day of March, 2025.
Daniel Thorp
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Daniel Thorp        Yann Griffaux
________________
15. Language Test Policy
   1. Purpose
The Language Test Policy shall establish a standardized process for evaluating the bilingual proficiency of candidates for positions requiring French-English communication within the Society. It ensures that individuals in these roles possess the necessary language skills to effectively engage with members, fulfill their responsibilities, and contribute to a bilingual and inclusive environment.
   2. Scope
The Language Test Policy shall apply to all candidates for positions within the Society that require bilingual proficiency. It outlines the assessment criteria, testing procedures, recognized certifications, and alternative means of demonstrating language proficiency. This policy also establishes the validity period of test results and the requirements for candidates seeking exemption through certification or educational proof.
   3. Policy
Candidates for positions who are subject to this policy must demonstrate French-English bilingualism with the following:
1. Completing the ESS Language Test, administered unbiasedly by both the VP Francophone Affairs and Manager of Translations—or one of them if either position is vacant-–, the test consists of:
   1. Part 1: Oral Comprehension & Production Candidates will participate in an in-person interview designed to verify their ability to:
      1. Follow and participate in discussions in French/English, including debates or role-play scenarios relevant to the position.
      2. Engage in live interpretation (oral translation), such as reformulating a short English message into French and vice versa.
      3. Communicate effectively, ensuring clarity and professionalism in interactions as well as the ability to adopt a more colloquial tone when needed. 
   2. Part 2: Writing Comprehension & Production: Candidates will complete tasks, in-person, assessing their ability to:
      1. Write context-appropriate communications in French, including formal and informal messages.
      2. Translate short documents, ensuring the message is clear and suitable for its intended audience (e.g., emails, public announcements).
      3. The evaluation will include materials related to Board of Directors activities, formal communications, and informal social media interactions.
   3. Minimum Proficiency Requirement
      1. Candidates must obtain satisfactory results in all required evaluations to be eligible for the position.
      2. The judging panel will assess candidates using the guide in Appendix B.
      3. This guide will be provided to candidates in advance
   4. Results of the ESS language test will be valid for two (2) years following the completion of the test and may be used to fulfill language requirements in future elections.
2. Language Certification:
   1. A certificate from the University of Ottawa’s Official Languages and Bilingualism Institute (OLBI) or an equivalent certification recognized by the University (e.g., DELF B2 for French, TOEFL for English) obtained in the past 2 years  
   2. Applicants who are non-native speakers of both languages may present two separate certificates, one for each language.
3. Educational Proof:
   1. Documentation proving the completion of secondary or post-secondary education in French or English, either in Canada or abroad.
      1. Note: Immersion streams will not be accepted.
   2. Proof for the non-covered language must also be presented.
4. If a candidate submits documentation instead of taking the ESS language test, they must also have a conversation in both languages with the VP Francophone and Manager of Translations—or one of them if either position is vacant-– to verify their proficiency and get feedback on any areas for improvement relevant to the role.
   1. Effective Date
This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board.
Certified as an official policy of the Engineering Students’ Society, as enacted and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 9th day of March, 2025.
Dated the 9th day of March, 2025.
Carolina González        Maya Benhamou        Daniel Thorp
Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 29, 2026.
Yann Griffaux
________________
Appendix A – Forms
List of Forms
Form E1 - Officer Nomination Form
E2 - Class Presentation Confirmation Form
F1 - Expense Form
F2 - Budget Line Request
________________
Form E1 - Officer Nomination
Desired Position:         __________________________ 
     Name:         __________________________ 
     Email:         __________________________ 
Nomination Signatures
Name
	Student Number
	Signature
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	I, the undersigned full-time registered student in the Faculty of Engineering, do hereby accept to be nominated as a candidate for the ESS elections. Signature:_____________________________ Date:____________________ 
________________
Form E2 - Class Presentation
Candidate:
	__________________________
	

Course Code
	Date
	Prof Signature
	



	

	

	



	

	

	



	

	

	



	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



	

	

	



	

	

	



	

	

	



	

	

	________________


Form F1 - Expense Report
Name: __________________________ 
Email: __________________________ 
        (Please fill in with e-transfer email/phone number)
 Date: __________________________ 
Description
	Budget Line
	Amount
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Total:
	

	

Recipient Signature: _________________________
**For office use only**
	Amount Approved:
	

	Method of Reimbursement:
	

	Reference/Cheque Number:
	

	Signing Authority Signature:
	

	________________


Form F2 - Budget Line Request
(updated one)
    Name: __________________________ 
Position: __________________________ 
     Date: __________________________ 
Description of budget line:
  

Budget breakdown: 
Item
	Amount
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Total:
	

	

Signature: __________________________ 
**For office use only**
	Amount Approved:
	

	Budget Line Name:
	

	________________


Appendix B
Language proficiency assessment guide


The Society will verify bilingualism through the procedure below, provided by the Official Languages and Bilingualism Institute (OLBI).
1. Oral Comprehension and Production
Candidates will participate in an in-person interview designed to verify their ability to:
* Follow and participate in discussions in French/English, including debates or role-play scenarios relevant to the position.
* Engage in live interpretation (oral translation), such as reformulating a short English message into French and vice versa.
* Communicate effectively with members, ensuring clarity and professionalism in interactions as well as the ability to adopt a more colloquial tone when needed. 
2. Written Comprehension and Production
Candidates will complete tasks, in-person, assessing their ability to:
* Write context-appropriate communications in French, including formal and informal messages.
* Translate short documents, ensuring the message is clear and suitable for its intended audience (e.g., emails, public announcements).
* The evaluation will include materials related to Board of Directors activities, formal communications, and informal social media interactions.
For the debate (Oral Comprehension and Production)
	Meets requirements
	Comments
	1. Was the candidate able to follow the conversation in French?
	 
	 
	2. Did the candidate demonstrate that they could interact in French without major difficulty?
	 
	 
	3. Was the candidate able to participate in the conversation spontaneously and meaningfully?
	 
	 
	4. When speaking, was the candidate’s response clear and understandable enough?
	 
	 
	5. Could the candidate summarize key points from a discussion/debate in French in a way that made sense?
	 
	 
	6. Was the candidate able to switch between colloquial and formal language depending on the context?
	 
	 
	For the interpretation task (Oral translation) (Oral Comprehension and Production)
	 
	 
	7. When reformulating a message from English to French, did the candidate convey the information clearly and accurately?
	 
	 
	8. In an oral translation scenario, did the candidate avoid misunderstandings and maintain the intent of the message?
	 
	 
	9. In an interpretation scenario, were they able to adapt and rephrase effectively if needed?
	 
	 
	For the written translation task (Written Comprehension and Production)
	 
	 
	1. Does the candidate convey the meaning of the text correctly in their translation?
	 
	 
	2. Is their adaptation of the message functional and appropriate for a Francophone audience (even if not perfectly translated)?
	 
	 
	3. Is the text clear and suitable for the context (e.g., professional email, public announcement, etc.)?
	 
	 
	4. Is the language quality adequate? (e.g.  coherent text, correct grammar)?