 Policy and Procedure Manual 2025	 Table of Contents 1.0 Board Member Policy 1.1 Purpose 1.2 Scope 1.3 Policy 1.3.1 Chair of the Board 1.3.2 Secretary of the Board 1.3.3 Year Representatives 1.4 Effective Date 2.0 Executive Member Policy 2.1 Purpose 2.2 Scope 2.3 Policy 2.3.1 General Eligibility 2.3.2 Roles of the President 2.3.3 Roles of the Vice President of External Affairs 2.3.4 Roles of the Vice President of Finance and Administration 2.3.5 Roles of the Vice President of Academic Affairs 2.3.6 Roles of the Vice President of Communications 2.3.7 Roles of the Vice President of Internal Affairs 2.3.8 Roles of the Vice President of Services 2.3.9 Roles of the Vice President of Social Affairs 2.3.10 Roles of the Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs 2.3.11 Roles of the Vice President of Equity 2.3.12 Roles of the Vice President of Francophone Affairs 2.3.13 Roles of the Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives 2.3.14 Executive Elections 2.4 Effective Date 3.0 Manager Policy 3.1 Purpose 3.2 Scope 3.3 Policy 3.3.1 Definition and Creation of Managers 3.3.2 Eligibility 3.3.3 Appointment 3.3.4 Roles of the Manager of Marketing 3.3.5 Roles of the Manager of Social Media 3.3.6 Roles of the Manager of Information Technology 3.3.7 Roles of the Manager of Sponsorship 3.3.8 Roles of the Manager of Sports 3.3.9 Roles of the Manager of Translations 3.3.10 Roles of the Manager of Francophone Outreach 3.3.11 Roles of the Manager of Student Advocacy 3.3.12 Roles of the Manager of External Awareness 3.3.13 Roles of the Wine and Cheese Coordinator 3.3.14 Roles of the 101 Week Coordinator 3.4 Effective Date 4.0 Commissioner Policy 4.1 Purpose 4.2 Scope 4.3 Policy 4.3.1 Appointment 4.3.2 Eligibility 4.3.3 Roles of the Charity Commissioner 4.3.4 Roles of the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner 4.3.5 Roles of the ERTW Commissioner 4.3.6 Returning Officer/Godparent 4.3.7 Roles of the Commissioner of Finance 4.3.8 Roles of the Selection Commissioner 4.4 Effective Date 5.0 Committee Policy 5.1 Purpose 5.2 Scope 5.3 Policy 5.3.1 Selection Committee 5.3.2 Graphic Design Committee 5.3.3 University of Ottawa Engineering Competition (uOEC) Committee 5.3.4 Marketing Committee 5.3.5 101 Week Committee 5.4 Effective Date 6.0 Sub-Association Policy 6.1 Purpose 6.2 Scope 6.3 Policy 6.3.1 Recognized Sub-Associations 6.3.2 Requirements 6.3.3 Funding 6.3.4 Director Position 6.4 Effective Date 7.0 Removal from Office Policy 7.1 Purpose 7.2 Scope 7.3 Policy7.3.1 Impeachment 7.3.2 Resignation 7.4 Effective Date 8.0 Financial Controls Policy 8.1 Purpose 8.2 Scope 8.3 Policy 8.3.1 Signing Authority 8.3.2 Budget 8.3.3 Expense Reimbursement 8.4 Effective Date 9.0 Transition policy 9.1 Purpose 9.2 Scope 9.3 Policy 9.3.1 Creation of a Position Handbook 9.3.2 Access to Handbook 9.3.3 Transition Meeting 9.4 Effective Date 10.0 Locker Policy 10.1 Purpose 10.2 Scope 10.3 Policy 10.3.1 Rental Duration and Fees 10.3.2 Liability 10.3.3 Renewal 10.3.4 Transfer 10.4 Effective Date 11.0 Equipment Rental Policy 11.1 Purpose 11.2 Scope 11.3 Policy 11.3.1 Use 11.3.2 Fees 11.3.3 Damage 11.4 Effective Date 12.0 Inclusivity Policy 12.1 Purpose 12.2 Scope 12.3 Policy 12.3.1 ESS Accountability 12.3.2 Discipline 12.3.3 Exemptions 12.4 Effective Date 13.0 Procurement Policy 13.1 Purpose 13.2 Scope 13.3 Policy 13.3.1 Translation Verification 13.3.2 Vendor Selection 13.3.3 Conflict of Interest 13.3.4 Financial Oversight 13.4 Compliance 13.5 Effective Date 14.0 Language Test Policy 14.1 Purpose 14.2 Scope 14.3 Policy 14.4 Effective Date  Highlighted sections of this Policy Manual have been adopted by the Board of Directors with provisional effect. These sections remain in force unless and until they are confirmed, amended, or repealed by the Members at the next meeting of Members. 1.0 Board Member Policy 1.1 Purpose The Board Member Policy shall detail the specific positions available on the Board of Directors, their responsibilities, and the election procedures. 1.2 Scope The Board Member Policy shall apply to all Members of the Society. 1.3 Policy 1.3.1 Chair of the Board The Chair of the Board shall: a.	be responsible for maintaining order during meetings of the Board of Directors, and Members; i.	attend officer meetings to ensure accountability. b.	be knowledgeable of Robert's Rules of Order, the ESS policy and procedures and the by-laws; i.	conduct meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order Revised. c.	be unbiased, objective and impartial for the duration of the meeting; d.	maintain all documents of the Society during their tenure as Chair, including but not limited to: i.	meeting minutes; ii. 	a record of the Board of Directors; iii. 	a record of Officers and any changes; iv. 	a record of Members; and 	v. 	all Instruments of the Society. e.	appoint at least one (1) Secretary as per  1.3.2 Secretary of the Board at the first meeting of the academic year; i.	In the event that the secretary is unable to fulfil their duties at a meeting, the Chair shall appoint a replacement secretary for the duration of their absence. f.	have other duties and responsibilities as voted upon by the Board for the duration of said meeting; g.	ensure the agenda is formed and distributed to the Board by a deadline established by the Board of Directors at the first meeting of each academic year; h.	promote ESS events; i.	be informed of any major changes or incidents within ESS; j.	be responsible for the accountability of executive mandates; and k.	ensure that the Board of Directors meetings and related communications (minutes, attached documents, publicity, among others) are accessible to both Francophone and Anglophone students. 1.3.1.1 Eligibility of the Chair of the Board a. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy. 1.3.2 Secretary of the Board The Secretary of the Board shall: a.	not be a Director on the Board; b.	take minutes at all meetings of the Board and of the Members; and 	i. 	responsible for sending the minutes to the Manager of IT. c.	promote the activities of the Board in coordination with the Manager of Social Media, including meeting notices and summaries, board members introductions, and updates; d. not have voting rights. 1.3.3 Year Representatives 1.3.3.1 Eligibility All year representatives of the Society shall: a.	be active Members; b.	be in good standing with the Society and faculty; and c.	be able to represent their year and program. 1.3.3.2 Election An election will be held at the Annual General Meeting (AGM) to elect the following Members by ordinary resolution of the Members: a.	One second-year representative from each of the following; i.	Chemical engineering; ii.	Civil engineering; iii.	Electrical engineering; iv. 	Mechanical engineering; v.	Biomedical mechanical engineering; vi.	Software engineering; vii.	Computer engineering; and viii.	the French stream. b.	One third-year representative from each of the following; i.	Chemical engineering; ii.	Civil engineering; iii.	Electrical engineering; iv. 	Mechanical engineering; v.	Biomedical mechanical engineering; vi.	Software engineering; vii.	Computer engineering; and viii.	the French stream. c.	One fourth-year or higher representative from each of the following; i.	Chemical engineering; ii.	Civil engineering; iii.	Electrical engineering; iv. 	Mechanical engineering; v.	Biomedical mechanical engineering; vi.	Software engineering; vii.	Computer engineering; and viii.	the French stream. d.	One co-op representative from each of the following; i.	Chemical engineering; ii.	Civil engineering; iii. 	Electrical engineering; iv. 	Mechanical engineering; v.	Biomedical mechanical engineering; vi.	Software engineering; and vii.	Computer engineering. e.	One representative from the Multidisciplinary Design program; and f.	One representative who is registered with SASS. A meeting of Members shall be held each September to elect the following Members by ordinary resolution of the Members: a.	One first-year representative from each GNG 1105 class of the fall semester; b.	One first-year representative from each GNG 1505 class of the fall semester; c.	One first-year representative who is enrolled in the SEG 2900 class of the fall semester; and d.	One first-year representative who is enrolled in the PHY 1121/PHY 1521 class of the fall semester. The following ex-officio members shall be members of the Board, without voting rights: a.	One representative of the UOSU Board of Directors; and b.	The Chair of the Engineering Endowment Fund. 1.3.3.3 Responsibility The responsibility of the year representatives listed in section  1.3.3.2 shall be: a.	to be a Director of the Society and represent their class at the meetings of the Board in terms of voting and opinions stated; b.	to report to the Society from their individual classes about issues to be addressed; c.	to report back to the class and make class presentations for the Society; d.	to participate and help with the initiative put forth by the Officers; and e.	to submit an academic report to the VP Academic each Semester. 1.3.3.4 Incompatibility  No Member may hold more than one (1) vote at a meeting of the Board. 1.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Maya Benhamou 	Daniel Thorp Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye 	Daniel Thorp Brooke MacQuarrie	 2.0 Executive Member Policy 2.1 Purpose The Executive Member Policy shall detail the roles of executives and the specific procedures and requirements for electing Officers of the Society. 2.2 Scope The Executive Member Policy shall apply to all Members of the Society. 2.3 Policy 2.3.1 General Eligibility Any active Member of the Society may run for an Executive position of the Society provided that the Member: a.	is in good standing with the Society and faculty; b.	will be in their second year at the University of Ottawa, or greater, while in office; and c.	will be taking three (3) or more classes or on a co-op term in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.2 Roles of the President The President of the Society shall: a.	oversee all the Vice-President positions; b.	be an ex-officio Member of all committees of the ESS; c.	work with Officers to report recommendations to the Board of Directors; d.	work to ensure positive relations with Members, professional and public organizations, administrative bodies and the media as the official spokesperson of the Society; e.	organize a weekend-long transition meeting before the end of July for all outgoing and incoming Officers of the Society; f.	organize one (1) team-building event per semester for the Officers of the Society; g.	run mandatory meetings with the other Officers; i.	during the summer semester, meetings shall be held on a monthly basis; ii.	during the fall and winter semesters, meetings shall be held on a bi-weekly basis; and iii.	additional meetings shall be held as deemed necessary. h.	ensure the Society's By-Laws, policies and values are upheld, updated and modernized; i.	hold one (1) constitution review session per academic year. i.	write an update on the Society's affairs each semester to be published on the website and presented at the AGM, sent in a mailout, and highlighted on all social media to ensure transparency to the student body; i.	This can include, but is not limited to, the approved budget and executive updates. j.	maintain the history, lore and culture of the Society; k.	advertise the election of the Engineering Endowment Fund (EEF) Chair; i.	sit in on or send a proxy to the EEF advisory and executive committees meeting each semester. l.	select camp leaders for the Iron Ring Ceremony; m.	in case of emergency, they, after a successful special resolution vote of the Executive, assume responsibilities that do not officially fall within their functions, as provided for in the by-laws of the Society; n.	sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Presidents' Round Table; o.	ensure that only Members are eligible to attend conferences and/or competitions; p.	assess team dynamics by conducting semesterly surveys through an anonymous platform such as ITPMetrics; q.	appoint the Chief Electoral Officer as per 2.3.14.2. r.	organize all elections and report the results to members; s.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and t.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.2.1 Eligibility for President To run for President, an Active Member must: a.	have completed at least eight months as an Executive Member of the Society; b.	reside in the Ottawa region while holding office; c.	meet all criteria aforementioned, or the candidacy will be open in a sequential order;  i. if there is no other candidate who meets all requirements in  2.3.2.1.a and  2.3.2.1.b, the running will be open to all candidates that have previously served as an Officer of the Society; ii. if there is no other Candidate who meets all requirements in  2.3.2.1.d.i, the running will be open to all candidates that have previously served as a Director of the Society; and iii. if there is no other Candidate who meets all requirements in  2.3.2.1.d.ii, the running will be open to all Candidates that are an active Member of the Society. d.	be able to complete the Presidential duties during the entire term of office; and e.	must have, or obtain at the expense of the ESS, Emergency First Aid and CPR C or higher certification by the start of 101 Week activities. f.	in the event of Co-Presidents being elected, they are to share the role and responsibilities of the President mandate as stated in 2.3.2 2.3.3 Roles of the Vice President of External Affairs The Vice President of External Affairs (VP External) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Manager of Sports; b.	oversee the position of Selection Commissioner and help with the Selection Committee, whose purpose is to select all delegates to attend all applicable conferences; c.	be responsible for the registration and travel of all delegates; d.	host and organize a Pre-delegate meeting for each ESS delegation prior to attendance of the conference; e.	act as the Head-Delegate for all conferences and represent the University of Ottawa on the ESSCO and CFES councils; i.	should the Vice President of External Affairs be unable to attend any external meeting, they shall be responsible for appointing a proxy and/or head delegate as required as per ESSCO and CFES rules. f.	report recommendations based on the functioning of other Engineering Students' Societies to the Board of Directors; g.	increase the visibility of the Society and protect its reputation within the University and the public; h.	write a report about each conference attended during the semester to be posted on the website and provide a summary to the Board of Directors. If the VP External sends another member as the head delegate, they shall create the report and forward it to theVP External who must present it to the Board; i.	write a report each semester on how different Engineering Societies operate and how the Society could bring about these changes; j.	facilitate communication with other Engineering Societies as well as provide inter-university contacts to the Officers of the Society; k.	ensure that Members are informed of opportunities available through the Engineering Students Societies' Council of Ontario (ESSCO) and the Canadian Federation of Engineering Students (CFES); l.	ensure that the Society remains in good standing with ESSCO and CFES; i.	to leave or change the status of the Society in reference to the aforementioned organizations will be determined by a special resolution at a Board of Directors meeting followed by a special resolution at a Meeting of Members; 1. an email shall be sent out to all Members to maintain an informed Membership; m.	promote the opportunity of hosting a conference and aid the host committee; n.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and o.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.4 Roles of the Vice President of Finance and Administration The Vice President of Finance and Administration (VPFA) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Manager of Sponsorship; b.	report recommendations of fiscal policies to the Board of Directors; c.	present the annual budget to the Board of Directors 14 days before 101 Week; d.	prepare for each meeting of the Board of Directors a financial report, consisting of: i.	all cheques written; ii.	all funds received; iii.	all monies owed to the Society; iv. 	all monies owed by the Society; and 	v. 	a realized, up-to-date copy of the budget. e.	present a summary of the financial report at each meeting of the Board of Directors and have it published on the website within seven (7) days of the meeting; f.	make the approved annual budget available on the website and to all Members upon request; g.	be responsible for completing all UOSU audits and submitting them on time; h.	assist the Officers with all funding applications; i.	ensure that any cash collected by the Society is counted bi-weekly; i.	a Member who is not in possession of a key to the register must be present during the counting of the money. j.	get a monthly report from the Manager of Sponsorship on what progress has been made; k.	sit in on or send proxy to the University of Ottawa Student Union Money Round Table; l.	sit in on or send a proxy to the EEF advisory and executive committees meeting each semester; m.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and n.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.4.1 Eligibility for Vice President of Finance and Administration To run for VPFA, an active Member must: a. be at least 18 years of age at the start of their mandate. 2.3.5 Roles of the Vice President of Academic Affairs The Vice President of Academic Affairs (VP Academic) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Wine and Cheese Coordinator; b.	oversee the position of Manager of Student Advocacy; c.	act as the official ombudsperson for any and all academic concerns brought forward by undergraduate engineering students, and to do so in confidence as requested by the student(s) or the Council; d.	compile at least one (1) report per semester on academic issues facing students to be presented to the Dean of Engineering; e.	work to ensure that Engineering Students at the Faculty learn to effectively utilize all existing school services available to them, to introduce useful concepts and skills to ensure both academic and professional success; f.	sit in on or send proxy the Curriculum Committee of the faculty; g.	hold monthly meetings with the Vice Dean Academic of the Faculty; h.	sit or send a proxy to the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) meetings; i.	sit in on or send a proxy to the Library Committee; j.	sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union University Affairs Round Table; k.	obtain statistics on academic issues facing students by communicating with students of the University on a regular basis; l.	meet with the year representatives on the Board at least once per semester to discuss academic issues; m.	hold one (1) Wine and Cheese during both the fall and winter semesters; n.	hold one (1) industry event during both the fall and winter semesters; 	i. 	which can include but is not limited to: 1. field trips; 2. speaker nights; or 3. career fairs. o.	hold one (1) Resume Workshop per academic year; p.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and q.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.6 Roles of the Vice President of Communications The Vice President of Communications (VP Communications) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Manager of Information Technology (IT); b.	oversee the position of Manager of Social Media; c.	oversee the position of Manager of Marketing; d.	be responsible for all publicity pertaining to the Society; e.	ensure all publicity is posted in English and French, preferably on the same notice; f.	coordinate the production of the engineering handbook to be available before 101 Week; g.	ensure that the reputation of the Society is upheld on social media; h.	ensure all Society events and services are advertised on the Society's social media accounts and through bi-weekly mailouts; i.	maintain an updated email list of all full Members of the Society; j.	report recommendations on all matters, informational and technological, to the Board of Directors; k.	ensure the availability and accessibility of meeting minutes; i.	from meeting of the Board; and ii.	from meetings of Members. l.	create other engaging content for the social media accounts; m.	evaluate and seek out new forms of communications to engage with more members of the Society; n.	sit in on or send a proxy to the University of Ottawa Student Union Communications round table; o.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and p.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.6.1 Eligibility for Vice President of Communications To run for VP Communications, an active Member must: a. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy. 2.3.7 Roles of the Vice President of Internal Affairs The Vice President of Internal Affairs (VP Internal) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner, whose purpose is to plan and run this competition in the fall semester; i.	this will act as a qualifying round to the Ontario Engineering Competition (OEC); ii.	ensure the travel and accommodations for all eligible teams competing in the OEC and the Canadian Engineering Competition (CEC); b.	work with the faculty to plan activities as part of National Engineering Month; c.	organize four (4) events during the school year, events for NEM may be counted towards this objective; d.	oversee the workings of the different Sub-Associations of the Society, and coordinate the activities of those Sub-Associations with the VP Social; e.	provide guidance and access to applicable ESS services to sub-associations should they require it; f.	meet with Sub-Association representatives at least once per semester to ensure theSociety's Policies and Procedure Manual are upheld, as defined in  6.0 Sub-Association Policy; g.	meet with engineering teams to improve relations and maintain communications. h.	be in charge of the hiring process of Managers outside of the appointment process that takes place at the AGM. i.	take minutes at all officer meetings and make them publicly available; j.	manage the volunteer database and record volunteer hours; k.	maintain the office and order office supplies as needed; l.	organize a volunteer appreciation event; m.	in the event of a presidential resignation, the VP Internal will fulfill the responsibilities of the President until an Interim President is appointed; n.	provide assistance to the President as requested; o.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and p.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.7.1 Eligibility for Vice President of Internal Affairs To run for VP Internal, an active Member must: a. not hold an executive position on any Sub-Association and may not become an executive of a Sub-Association. 2.3.8 Roles of the Vice President of Services The Vice President of Services (VP Services) of the Society shall: a.	form and lead the Graphic Design Committee, whose purpose is to provide designs and artwork for use by the Society; b.	obtain and maintain bilingual engineering merchandise to be sold by the Society; c.	organize at least one (1) fitting session per academic year for leather jackets; d.	maintain the lockers and the list of registered lockers; e.	establish all prices for products sold by the Society in conjunction with the VPFA; f.	maintain an active catalogue of available merchandise on the Society's website; g.	maintain all equipment that can be rented by the Society; h.	hold one (1) event per semester for patch sewing; i.	maintain and promote the patch culture; 	ii. 	maintain and promote covie culture. i.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and j.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.9 Roles of the Vice President of Social Affairs The Vice President of Social Affairs (VP Social) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Manager of 101 Week; b.	form and oversee the 101 Week Committee; c.	organize 101 Week and pass on updates to the Executive during the summer meetings; 	i. 	this week should include but is not limited to the following: 1.	two (2) wet events following guidelines set by UOSU; 2.	one (1) icebreaker event to get to know your peers; 3.	one (1) event to get to know the city of Ottawa; 4.	one (1) messy day event to be initiated into engineering culture; 5.	one (1) event in collaboration with the Undergraduate Nursing Student Association (UNSA); 6.	one (1) event in collaboration with the Science Students' Association (SSA); and 7.	one (1) event in collaboration with the Computer Science Students' Association (CSSA). d.	hold one (1) STAGED per academic year; e.	hold three (3) DUSTEDs, one (1) per semester; f.	hold two (2) Iron Ring After Parties, one (1) to be hosted in the evening following each Iron Ring Wine and Cheeses; g.	hold one (1) GOAT in each of the fall and winter semesters immediately following exams; h.	hold two (2) social events which are accessible to all students per academic year; and i.	hold one (1) of these social events with another Recognized Student Government of the University of Ottawa; i.	conduct one (1) post-event survey following the conclusion of 101 Week; j.	if requested, aid the VP Social of a sub-association in the preparation of a social event; k.	sit in on or send a proxy to the University of Ottawa Student Union Social Round Table; l.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and m.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.9.1 Eligibility for Vice President of Social Affairs To run for VP Social, an active Member must: a.	reside in Ottawa over the summer; and b.	must have, or obtain at the expense of the ESS, Emergency First Aid and CPR C or higher certification by the start of 101 Week activities. 2.3.10 Roles of the Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs The Vice President of Philanthropic Affairs (VP Philanthropic) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Charity Commissioner; b.	hold one (1) philanthropic campaign during the fall and winter semesters; c.	form and lead the Engineering Charity Ball Committee, whose purpose is to organize and run the annual engineering charity ball; d.	participate in philanthropic events organized by ESSCO and CFES; e.	organize at least one (1) philanthropic event for 101 Week; f.	assist the VP Social with the organization of 101 Week philanthropic events as required; g.	coordinate all social events with a philanthropic nature throughout the academic year; h.	sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Philanthropic Round Table; i.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and j.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.11 Roles of the Vice President of Equity The Vice President of Equity (VP Equity) shall: a.	oversee the position of Returning Officer; b.	write an equity report each semester to be posted on the website and provide a summary to the Board of Directors; c.	organize anti-oppression training for Officers, Directors, and representatives ofSub-Associations; d.	maintain an internal conflict form and help manage any conflicts with the help of theReturning Officer; e.	sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Equity Round Table; f.	sit in on or send a proxy to the faculty EDI advisory committee; g.	host at least one (1) morale event per semester; h.	host at least one (1) diversity event per semester; i.	advocate for equitable rights in the Society and its activities as specified in  12.0 Inclusivity Policy; j.	maintain good relations with marginalized groups in the engineering community at the University of Ottawa; i.	maintain communications with the sub-associations and equitable clubs. ii.	plan one (1) join equity-focused event per year. k.	attend the Conference on Diversity in Engineering or equivalent; l.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and m.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.12 Roles of the Vice President of Francophone Affairs The Vice President of Francophone Affairs (VP Francophone) of the Society shall: a.	oversee the position of Manager of Translations; b.	form and oversee the French Translation and Content Supervisory Committee; c.	represent the interests of francophone engineering students; d.	ensure that bilingualism of ESS is upheld, respected, and followed; e.	organize one (1) French-language event for 101 Week; f.	organize one (1) activity for Mois de la Francophonie; g.	organize one (1) additional French-language event for Francophone engineering students per semester; h.	work to ensure the quality of French-language programs and courses at the Faculty; i.	sit in on or send proxy the University of Ottawa Student Union Francophone Affairs Roundtable; j.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and k.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.12.1 Eligibility for Vice President of Francophone Affairs To run for VP Francophone, an active Member must: a.	Self-identify as a Francophone student; and b.	meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy. 2.3.13 Roles of the Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives The Vice President of Sustainable Initiatives (VP Sustainability) of the Society shall: a.	seek ties with sustainable clubs and ventures at the University of Ottawa, as well as maintain ties with the University of Ottawa's sustainability office; b.	support internal sustainability-related events and affairs; c.	consult on sustainability initiatives related to or involving the Society or the faculty; d.	complete a formal semesterly evaluation of the Society's sustainability practices to be posted on the website; e.	attend the Conference on Sustainability in Engineering or equivalent; f.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and g.	unless otherwise voted upon by the executive, hold at least three (3) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 2.3.14 Executive Elections 2.3.14.1 Election Period Elections shall be held in two stages, with Presidential elections taking place in November and all other executive elections taking place in January. Once voted in, the new team will begin shadowing their predecessor until their mandate begins in May. 2.3.14.2 Chief Electoral Officer Any person who is not a candidate, official representative, or candidate's volunteer in the election can be selected as Chief Electoral Officer. Preferably, the Chief Electoral Officer shall not be an engineering student. In the event that such a person could not be found, the Officers shall nominate a person who is not an Officer. The Chief Electoral Officer shall be paid an honorarium of $150 for by-elections and $300 for regular elections adjusted for CPI as of 2024. 2.3.14.3 Tiebreaker Prior to the beginning of the voting period, the Chief Electoral Officer will decide on a tie-breaker candidate in any contested election at their discretion. They will seal the results in an envelope to be signed and dated by the President and placed in a locker for which only the Chief Electoral Officer will have the combination. 2.3.14.4 Official Representatives and Volunteers An election volunteer: a.	must be registered with the CEO; b.	can be any University of Ottawa student; c.	cannot serve on more than one candidate's campaign in the same election; d.	are limited to posting on social media during the campaigning period; and e.	are subject to all campaigning rules and penalties as outlined below. An official representative has all the same functions of an election volunteer, in addition to: a.	being able to help put posters up; and b.	being able to proxy class talks. 2.3.14.5 Candidate Nomination Any Member who wishes to run must submit form E1 (Officer Nomination) by the date set by the Chief Electoral Officer. The nomination shall include 15 signatures of Members of the Society and a platform of less than 200 words per language written in English and French. A translator may be chosen at the candidate's discretion and is not considered an official representative or volunteer. Platforms shall be included on the ballot. Before the voting period begins, an email shall be sent to all Members, listing all candidates and their respective platforms. Any two (2) Members may submit a nomination to be Co-Presidents. 2.3.14.6 Candidates Meeting A candidates' meeting will be held before the campaign period. All candidates must be present unless otherwise arranged with the chief electoral Officer. At this meeting, the chief electoral officer will outline the election rules and disclose all penalties associated with infractions of these rules. 2.3.14.7 Campaign Period The campaign period shall last for at minimum seven (7) business days, including polling days.  During this period, candidates are required to participate in an election debate between all positions and make at least four (4) class presentations in the language of their choice in engineering courses or courses with "engineering" in their title at the discretion of the Chief Electoral Officer. Candidates running for VP Communications and VP Francophone are required to conduct at least one of these presentations in each official language. Form E2 (Class Presentation Confirmation) shall be submitted to the Chief Electoral Officer before the end of the campaign period as proof of completed class presentations. Candidates are allowed to spend a maximum of $50 on posters, banners, or any other campaign-related expenditure. The Society shall cover the cost of posters printed using the Society's printer, but this expense shall count toward the allowed expenditures described above. All campaign receipts must be submitted. Physical promotion must follow the following rules: a. no more than twenty-five (25) posters may be printed, and they may only be posted in SITE and CBY; i.	posters must be approved by the CEO prior to posting; ii.	posters must be fully bilingual; iii.	physical posters must be stamped at the ESS office; iv. 	all posters must be taken down after voting; and 	v. 	violation of the rules outlined above will result in a 5% penalty in votes. Digital promotion must follow the following rules: a. Social media posts are limited to Facebook, Instagram, and Discord; i. 	all posts must be open to the public; ii. 	all posts must be bilingual; iii. 	all posts on Facebook and Instagram must tag ESS; iv. 	all posts must include the ESS logo; v.	all posts must be sent to the CEO and approved prior to publication; and vi.	violation of the rules outlined above will result in a 5% penalty in votes. In addition, a candidate will be disqualified if found guilty, at the discretion of the Chief Electoral Officer, of: a.	defamation; or b.	use of the Society, UOSU or other Recognized Student Government resource not available to every student; or c.	not submitting a completed nomination by the deadline set; or d.	not attending the candidates' meeting without arrangement with the Chief Electoral Officer; or e.	candidate must not hold any position on the UOSU Executive or have an active nomination; or f.	slating; or g.	any other offence as specified by the Chief Electoral Officer. In the event that a candidate is disqualified after submitting a complete nomination, the candidate must present themselves to the Board of Directors and, by resolution, be approved to run in any subsequent election of the Society. If a candidate in a contested election is disqualified after voting has begun: a.	and the winning candidate is disqualified, the Board of Directors shall appoint a Member of the Society to the vacant office until a By-Election is held; b.	in a three-way or more election, if a candidate is disqualified whose number of votes could have affected the outcome of the election, the Board of Directors will appoint a Member of the Society to the vacant office until a By-Election is held; and c.	in all other cases, the election results are upheld and shared. A candidate may appeal any penalty or disqualification decision issued by the Chief Electoral Officer by submitting a formal appeal within 24 hours to the Board of Directors. If a candidate is dissatisfied with the Board's decision, they may escalate the appeal to the UOSU Appeals Committee within 24 hours of the Board's ruling. While an appeal is pending, the candidate shall remain on the ballot, but the election results shall not be ratified until a final ruling is issued. 2.3.14.8 Voting period The voting period shall be a minimum of three (3) business days. Candidates may continue campaigning throughout this period, which shall be considered an extension of the campaign period. Voting shall take place via a secure, third-party online voting platform. A preferential voting system shall be used when the number of candidates exceeds the number of available positions. If the number of candidates is equal to or fewer than the available positions, a confidence voting system shall be used for each candidate. 2.3.14.9 By-Elections All By-Elections shall be held between September 15 and March 30 within a period of 20 business days after an executive position becomes vacant. The By-Election shall be conducted with the same procedures as a regular Executive election. The executives, at their discretion, may appoint a Member to the executive position until a By-Election can be conducted in accordance with this policy. 2.3.14.10 	Election Results The Chief Electoral Officer shall certify the election results and ensure they are submitted to the Chair of the Board. Within 72 hours of the end of the voting period, the provisional results shall be sent to all Members, clearly marked as subject to ratification by the Board of Directors. The Board shall ratify the final results, after which the certified results shall be distributed to all Members. 2.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Daniel Thorp Alae Boufarrachene Domenick Mann 	Eric Hagen Hayley Jubinville 	Sofia Ershova Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye 	Daniel Thorp Brooke MacQuarrie 	Carolina González 	Jad Mghabghab 	Ethan Tang 	Maya Benhamou	 3.0 Manager Policy 3.1 Purpose The Manager Policy shall detail the roles of Managers and procedures for the election of Managers. 3.2 Scope The Manager Policy shall apply to all Members of the Society. 3.3 Policy 3.3.1 Definition and Creation of Managers A Manager of the Society shall be a Member appointed to assist an executive. To create a Manager position, a list of the Manager's responsibilities, including the executive to whom the Manager reports, shall be indicated. 3.3.2 Eligibility Any active Member of the Society may apply for a Manager position of the Society provided that the Member is in good standing with the faculty. 3.3.3 Appointment All Managers shall be appointed by resolution of the Members at the annual general meeting for a term of May 1st to April 30, with the exception of the Manager of 101 week whose duration of their mandate is defined in section  f. If any Manager position should be or become vacant during this term, the Officers may appoint a Member to the Manager position after the vacant position has been advertised for a minimum of one (1) week. 3.3.4 Roles of the Manager of Marketing The Manager of Marketing of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP Communications; b.	work to increase engagement from engineering students; c.	work to find additional advertisement streams for the Society to pursue; d.	conduct in-person marketing initiatives such as postering and tabling; e.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and f.	as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office. 3.3.5 Roles of the Manager of Social Media The Manager of Social Media of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP Communications; b.	oversee the marketing committee; c.	generate promotional material for events and posts; d.	assist with the design of the handbook; e.	maintain the brand of the Society; f.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and g.	as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office. 3.3.6 Roles of the Manager of Information Technology The Manager of Information Technology (Manager of IT) of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP Communications; b.	maintain and make recommendations on improving all servers, audio-visual equipment, inventory of technical equipment, websites, and other technologies of the Society and proper documentation thereof; c.	reset passwords of officer emails at the start of each term; d.	update the website with minutes of different meetings, reports to be posted, and the up-to-date budget; e.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and f.	as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office. 3.3.7 Roles of the Manager of Sponsorship The Manager of Sponsorship of the Society shall: a.	report to the VPFA; b.	oversee the position of ERTW Commissioner; c.	maintain an up-to-date sponsorship package and sponsorship spreadsheet; d.	reach out to companies in the hope of acquiring monetary or other gain; e.	host one financial literacy and outreach event per semester or organize the contracting of one; f.	give a monthly report to the VPFA on what progress has been made; g.	create and send the annual holiday thank you cards; h.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and i.	as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office. 3.3.8 Roles of the Manager of Sports The Manager of Sports of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP External; b.	coordinate inter-university sporting activities, including but not limited to Eng Hockey and Eng Rugby; c.	coordinate co-ed intramural sports, including esports, for Engineers; d.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and e.	as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office. 3.3.9 Roles of the Manager of Translations The Manager of Translations of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP Francophone; b.	assist in overseeing the French Translation and Content Supervisory Committee; c.	be bilingual in French and English; d.	be responsible for translating all Society documents and announcements within a reasonable time frame, including: i.	minutes from Board of Directors meetings to be posted on the website before the next Board of Directors meeting; ii.	minutes from the Annual General Meeting to be posted on the website before      101 Week; iii. 	the constitution to be posted on the website by the end of their term; and iv. 	any other information requested to be translated by officers. e.	report mistranslations to the VP Communications as necessary; f.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in the fall and winter semesters; and g.	as voted upon by the executive, may hold availability in the office. 3.3.9.1 Eligibility of the Manager of Translations a. meet the bilingualism requirements as outlined in the Language Test Policy. 3.3.10 Roles of the Manager of Student Advocacy The Manager of Student Success of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP Academic and VP External; b.	aid in addressing academic issues facing engineering students; c.	help VP Academic with the Academic report and share with VP External; d.	help VP Equity with the Equity report and share with VP External; e.	help improve, promote and keep track of educational resources and scholarships offered within the faculty and university; f.	advocate for student success; g.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and h.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 3.3.11 Roles of the Manager of External Awareness The Manager of External Awareness of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP External; b.	support VP External with any take-backs; c.	promote ESSCO and CFES within uOttawa; d.	host at least one (1) external awareness event per semester; e.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and f.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 3.3.12 Roles of the Wine and Cheese Coordinator The Manager of Wine and Cheese of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP Academic; and b.	help to plan and run one (1) Wine and Cheese in both the fall and winter semesters. 3.3.13 Roles of the 101 Week Coordinator The 101 Week Coordinator of the Society shall: a.	form and lead the 101 Week Committee; b.	hold office until the conclusion of 101 Week; c.	report to the VP Social with 101 Week related events throughout the summer; 	i. 	assist the VP Philanthropic with the organization of the philanthropic event during 101 Week; d.	assist in the coordination of 101 Week events throughout the week; and e.	reside in Ottawa during the summer. 3.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Daniel Thorp Jason Gonzales 	Sofia Ershova Dakota Squires Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye	  4.0 Commissioner Policy 4.1 Purpose The Commissioner Policy shall detail the roles of Commissioners and procedures for the election of Commissioners. 4.2 Scope The Commissioner Policy shall apply to all Members of the Society. 4.3 Policy 4.3.1 Appointment All commissioners shall be appointed by the officer holding the position they report to. To create a Commissioner position, a list of the Commissioner's responsibilities, including the officer to whom the Commissioner reports, shall be indicated. 4.3.2 Eligibility Any active Member of the Society may apply for a Commissioner position of the Society provided that the Member is in good standing with the faculty. 4.3.3 Roles of the Charity Commissioner The Charity Commissioner shall: a.	report to the VP Philanthropic; b.	aid in the planning and execution of all philanthropic events held by the society; and c.	help lead the Charity Committee. 4.3.4 Roles of the University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner The University of Ottawa Engineering Competition Commissioner (uOEC Commissioner) shall: d. report to the VP Internal; and e. form and lead the uOEC Committee, whose purpose is to plan and run this competition in the fall semester. 4.3.5 Roles of the ERTW Commissioner The ERTW Commissioner shall: a.	report to the Manager of Sponsorships; and b.	seek business ties with retailers to expand partnerships for the ERTW sticker. 4.3.6 Returning Officer/Godparent The Returning Officer shall: a.	report to the VP Equity; b.	provide context to decisions taken by the previous ESS executive and act as an advisor to the sitting executive; and c.	oversee the team and act as an unbiased mediator in all ESS-related matters or internal conflicts. 4.3.6.1 Eligibility for Returning Officer/Godparent To run for Returning Officer, an active Member must: a. have been an executive in the previous year. i. If the directorship of the returning officer cannot be filled by an immediate previous executive, the sitting executive may appoint any previous executive member. 4.3.7 Roles of the Commissioner of Finance The Commissioner of Finance of the Society shall: a.	report to the VP of Finance and Administration; b.	complete UOSU audit training; c.	assist with organizing reimbursements; d.	assist with audits; e.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one class presentation in fall and winter semesters; and f.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters. 4.3.8 Roles of the Selection Commissioner a.	report to the VP External Affairs; and b.	lead the Selection Committee, whose purpose is to select all delegates to attend all applicable conferences. 4.3.9 Roles of the Commissioner of Francophone Outreach The Commissioner of Francophone Outreach of the Society shall:  a.	report to the VP Francophone;  b.	support the VP Francophone in all scheduled events and initiatives including but not limited to planning, hosting, procuring and making promotional content; c.	represent the interests of francophone engineering students; d.	work to ensure the active participation of Francophone students in ESS events, services and policies; e.	unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, conduct at least one French-language class presentation in fall and winter semesters;  f.	and unless otherwise voted upon by the Officers, hold at least one and a half (1.5) hours of availability in the office per week in the fall and winter semesters.  4.3.9.1 Eligibility of the Commissioner of Francophone Outreach a.	Self-identify as a Francophone student; b.	Apply in French; 4.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on April 7, 2024. Mackenzie Conrad 	Jason Gonzalez 	Daniel Thorp Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Cyrus Choi	 5.0 Committee Policy 5.1 Purpose The specific role of the Committee Policy shall outline specific tasks that each Committee of the Society shall be given. 5.2 Scope The specific roles of the Committee and their purpose shall be outlined and apply to members of each specific committee. 5.3 Policy 5.3.1 Selection Committee The Selection Committee (SC) shall: a.	operate under the purview of the VP External. b.	be chaired by the Selection Commissioner, who shall; 	i. 	only have voting rights in the event of a tie; c.	consist of a minimum of three (3) active Members selected by the VP External Affairs, none of which have applied for said delegation; and the VP External Affairs, who shall have voting rights; d.	vote on candidates via anonymous ranked ballot; e.	provide feedback about a candidate's performance on the application process if requested by the candidate within fourteen (14) days of receiving the final decision from the SC; and f.	consider all applicants equally regardless of experience. 5.3.2 Graphic Design Committee The Graphic Design Committee shall: a.	report directly to the VP Services; b.	provide designs and artwork as requested by Officers; 	i. 	given an adequate time frame. c.	help the VP Services to design merch; and d.	help make graphics for social media if needed. 5.3.3 University of Ottawa Engineering Competition (uOEC) Committee The uOEC Committee shall: a.	report directly to the VP Internal and uOEC Commissioner; b.	plan and run uOEC; and c.	be made up of but is not limited to, the following teams: i.	logistics; ii.	merchandise; and iii.	competitions. 5.3.4 Marketing Committee The Marketing Committee shall: a.	report to the Managers of Social Media and Marketing; and b.	work to increase engagement from engineering students. 5.3.5 101 Week Committee The 101 Week Committee shall: a.	report to the VP Social and the manager of 101 Week; and b.	help plan and execute 101 Week. 5.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Eric Hagen Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye	  6.0 Sub-Association Policy 6.1 Purpose The Sub-Association Policy shall detail the specific rules and procedures of associations with Sub-Association status with the Society. 6.2 Scope The Sub-Association Policy shall apply to all associations with Sub-Association status within the Society. 6.3 Policy 6.3.1 Recognized Sub-Associations The recognized Sub-Associations of the Society and represented programs of study shall be: a.	IEEE: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers; i.	Multidisciplinary Design; ii.	Software Engineering; iii.	Electrical Engineering; and iv. 	Computer Engineering. b.	ChESS: Chemical Engineering Students' Society; i.	Chemical Engineering. c.	MESS: Mechanical Engineering Students' Society; and i.	Mechanical Engineering; and ii.	Biomedical Mechanical Engineering. d.	CESA: Civil Engineering Students' Association; i.	Civil Engineering. 6.3.2 Requirements Each Sub-Association of the Society shall: a.	hold a minimum of one (1) social event per semester; b.	hold a minimum of one (1) academic event per semester; c.	organize a delegation to a departmental conference if applicable; d.	hold elections in the winter semester; e.	attempt to fill all vacant executive positions with By-Elections; f.	hold at least one (1) executive meeting in each Fall and Winter semester accessible to all Sub-Association members; g.	hold at least one (1) open meeting per semester in which the Sub-Association may get the input of the members outside of the executive team; i.	the meeting must be publicized at least one week in advance, ii.	all executive members and year representatives must be in attendance or else be represented by a proxy. h.	abide by their own constitution; i.	make their approved annual budget available on their website and to all students by November 1 of each year; and i.	The budget must include all revenues and expenses. j.	take meeting minutes at all meetings and make them publicly available on their website. If any of these requirements should not be met a 30% penalty of the Sub-Association's next levy shall be applied. A Sub-Association may appeal this penalty through application to the Board. 6.3.3 Funding Each Sub-Association of the Society shall receive a minimum of 15% of the fee that the Society received from UOSU per student in each program of study which the Sub-Association holds Sub-Association status for. To be eligible for this funding, each Sub-Association shall complete a detailed audit by November 1 of each year, including: a.	an audit submission letter; b.	the currently approved constitution of their Sub-Association; c.	the previous and current year's budget; d.	a complete general ledger of the past year; e.	all monthly bank statements of the past year; and f.	a receipt for every cheque written. If the audit is not submitted by the above deadline, a penalty of 15% off the original amount for every week late will be imposed. If a submitted audit fails, the Sub-Association will be able to re-submit without penalty. Failure to provide the above within two months of the deadline results in the complete withdrawal of funding. 6.3.4 Director Position Each Sub-Association shall elect, by resolution of Members of the Sub-Association, a Director of the Society. 6.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Domenick Mann Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye 	Daniel Thorp Justin Beal	 7.0 Removal from Office Policy 7.1	Purpose The ESS wishes to be an inclusive and safe environment for all and, as such, will take action to ensure this. 7.2 Scope The Removal from Office Policy will apply to all ESS Officers, Directors, and Sub-association members. 7.3 Policy 7.3.1 Impeachment Any member may be impeached on any of the following grounds: a.	repeated infractions against the Inclusivity Policy; b.	failure to follow the regulations of the Constitution without just cause; c.	mismanagement of funds; d.	failure to comply with Canadian law or Ontario provincial law; e.	abuse of power: and f.	placing the ESS at risk. An impeachment shall be completed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of those present at a Board of Directors meeting. Any motion to impeach must specify the grounds for such impeachment and the specific events justifying the motion while maintaining sensitive confidentiality. The member being impeached must be notified of such a motion no less than five (5) days before such a motion is presented. If an impeachment motion is passed, the member impeached will be removed from office. Any member impeached through the Board will be forbidden from holding any of the following positions: a.	ESS Executive; b.	Board Member; c.	ESS Manager; d.	ESS Commissioner; e.	ESS Committee Member; f.	Sub-association Member; or g.	101 Week Guide. The Member will still be permitted to vote at General Meetings, Assemblies, referendums, and elections, so long as they remain members of the ESS. 7.3.2 Resignation Any member of the Executive Committee may leave office by addressing a letter of resignation to the President. In the case of the president's resignation, the letter should be addressed to the VP Internal. The resignation of a member takes effect two weeks upon receipt of such a letter. In this two-week period, the member resigning must work on a transition report for the elected official who will take their place. 7.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on April 7, 2024. Mackenzie Conrad 	Maya Benhamou 	Katelyn Renaud	 8.0 Financial Controls Policy 8.1	Purpose The Financial Controls Policy shall outline specific procedures when handling money of the Society. 8.2 Scope The Financial Controls Policy shall apply to all Members, Directors and Officers of the Society. 8.3 Policy 8.3.1 Signing Authority All cheques or any other transfer of funds of the Society shall be approved by any two of the: a. President; b.	Vice President of Financial Affairs; and c.	Vice President of Social Affairs. 8.3.2 Budget Any Officer may request funds for an event, service or any other project by completing Form F2 (Budget Line Request) and submitting it to the senior Vice President of Financial Affairs. A complete budget detailing the fiscal plans for the year must be assembled by the VPFA, and presented for approval by the Board of Directors before 101 week. All budget lines must be approved to the extent that: a.	the net gain or loss shall be considered the approved amount; b.	any net loss less than $300 shall be approved by the Officers of the Society; c.	any net loss equal to or greater than $300 shall be approved by the Board of Directors of the Society; d.	spring and summer expenses shall be approved by the Officers and ratified by the Board of Directors at the next meeting of the Board; and e.	if a net loss requiring approval from the Board of Directors cannot be approved in a reasonable amount of time, the Officers can approve the expense, and it shall be ratified at the next meeting of the Board. 8.3.3 Expense Reimbursement Any Member seeking reimbursement of approved expenses shall complete form F1 (Expense Report) and submit it along with the original receipt of the expense to the Vice President of Financial Affairs for approval. If an approved budget line for the expense exists, a reimbursement shall be issued for no more than approved. Any expenditures not approved shall be owed back to the Society from the Member who made the expense. 8.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye 	Daniel Thorp Cyrus Choi 	Maya Benhamou 	Eric Hagen	 9.0 Transition policy 9.1	Purpose The Transition Policy shall detail the specific actions required by duly elected Members of the Society when transitioning their replacement. 9.2 Scope The Transition Policy shall apply to all duly elected Members of the Society. 9.3 Policy 9.3.1 Creation of a Position Handbook To ensure the best chance of success for the Society, we must denote our best practices. Thus, in the month leading to the end of a Members term, they will update the handbook relating to their position with information regarding: a.	persons of interest and contact information; b.	events and their outcome; c.	general practices; and d.	other information relevant to their position. 9.3.2 Access to Handbook The handbook will be kept as a digital document and only accessible by the Member elected or appointed to that position. 9.3.3 Transition Meeting In addition to the handbook, the outgoing and incoming officers will have a one-on-one meeting to discuss its contents. 9.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Domenick Mann 	Maya Benhamou	  10.0	Locker Policy 10.1 Purpose The Locker Rental Policy shall detail all rules and procedures associated with the rental of any locker of the Society. 10.2 Scope The Locker Rental Policy applies to all Members and any non-member who uses the society's locker services. Locker use is restricted to university students. 10.3 Policy 10.3.1 Rental Duration and Fees The locker rental period is semesterly or yearly and ends the last day before the next semester begins. The cost of rental is to be at least $1 unless otherwise directed by the Board of Directors. Fees will be waived for current and past ESS Executives for the duration of their undergraduate degree. Upon purchasing the locker, students must identify themselves by student card. 10.3.2 Liability The Society will not provide a security lock. It is the sole responsibility of the renter to provide a security lock. The Society will not be responsible for the loss or damage of the renters' goods under any condition. 10.3.3 Renewal The renewal period is within the first month of the new semester. The Society will post an official deadline at a minimum of two (2) weeks in advance. Failure to renew will result in the loss of the renters' personal lock and locker. Lockers not renewed must be vacated by the last day of the renewal period. Items left in the locker will be recoverable for a fee of $5 for a period of one (1) month after the last day of the renewal period. Claims for items must be made in person at the Society's office. Items left for longer than a month will be disposed of at the discretion of the VP Services. 10.3.4 Transfer The Society reserves the right to transfer lockers at any time upon one (1) weeks' notice. 10.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu	 11.0	Equipment Rental Policy 11.1 Purpose The Equipment Rental Policy shall detail the specific procedures and rules associated with the rental of equipment owned by the Society. 11.2 Scope The Equipment Rental Policy shall apply to all Members and non-members renting equipment from the Society. 11.3 Policy 11.3.1 Use Equipment rental shall be prioritized to Sub-Associations, engineering clubs, and other Recognized Student Governments, and any other association or individuals may be approved at the discretion of the VP Services. Before equipment can be rented, the renter shall sign a rental contract in accordance with this policy. The contract should specify a date by which damage fees should be paid. 11.3.2 Fees All fees associated with equipment rental shall be determined by the VP Services. A complete list of all available items and their daily rental fee shall be maintained and made available on the website of the Society. Sub-associations and clubs shall be able to rent the equipment at no cost. Other Recognized Student Governments shall receive a 25% discount on all rental fees. All fees will be proposed by the VP Services and approved by the Board. 11.3.3 Damage The renter assumes all risk of loss or damage to the equipment from any cause and shall agree to return it to the Society in the condition received from the Society, with the exception of normal wear and tear. The VP Services will determine normal wear and tear. All determinations made by the VP Services are final. 11.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Aiden McCooeye	 12.0	Inclusivity Policy 12.1 Purpose The ESS wishes to be an inclusive and safe environment for all and, as such, will take action to ensure this. 12.2 Scope The Inclusivity Policy will apply to all ESS events and locations under the authority of the ESS. 12.3 Policy 12.3.1 ESS Accountability The ESS will promote a safe and inclusive environment for all Members of the Society. Thus, words or actions that are sexist, racist, homophobic, or otherwise discriminatory will not be tolerated. In line with this sentiment, words or actions that are violent, threatening or promote rape culture will also not be tolerated. 12.3.2 Discipline If an individual is found not to adhere to section  12.3.1, the steps as listed will be taken: a.	on a first offence, the individual should be educated on this policy and why their actions are not acceptable by an elected Member; b.	on a second offence, the individual will be put on probationary measures; and i.	probationary measures include but are not limited to the member being strictly overseen by the executives. c.	on a third offence, the individual will have their Membership revoked and be barred from all subsequent ESS events: i.	should a Member wish to challenge this, they will be required to attend an anti-oppression workshop and make a presentation to the Board about what they've learned. The Board will then revisit the membership revocation; and ii.	should the individual continue to disregard  12.3.1, a special meeting of the Board of Directors will be called to discuss the situation and decide what further action should be taken. 12.3.3 Exemptions a. any formal incident report made by the faculty or a conference board will cause the Member to skip the first step and go straight to probation with the option to appeal. 12.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be the By-Law No. 1 of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 6 day of March, 2016 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 3 day of April, 2016. Dated as of the 6 day of March, 2016. Nicholas Burgel Amended by the Board and Members on the 2nd of April 2017 Chloe Hayes Amended and confirmed by the Directors of the Society by special resolution on the 31st day of March, 2019. Dated as of the 10th day of March, 2019. Barber, Devon  	Davies, Travis  	Maloney, Liam  	Roche, Liam Amended by the Board and Members on the 28th of April 2021 Scott Fulton 	Alexis McCreath-Frangakis Liam Roche 	Julian Ward 	Reese Wunsche Antonia Zupu Amended by the Board and Members on April 7, 2024 Mackenzie Conrad 	Katelyn Renaud Amended by special resolution of the Board and confirmed by special resolution of the Members on March 9, 2025. Daniel Thorp Cyrus Choi 	Maya Benhamou 	Eric Hagen	 13.0	Procurement Policy 13.1 Purpose The Procurement Policy establishes procedures for the acquisition of goods and services by the Society to ensure that all purchases are conducted ethically, transparently, and efficiently, while maintaining financial accountability and fairness. 13.2 Scope This policy applies to all Officers, Directors, Committees, and Members of the Society involved in purchasing goods, services, rentals, leases, service agreements, subscriptions, and contractual commitments on behalf of the Society. All procurement activities must comply with the Society's financial controls and align with the approved budget. 13.3 Policy 13.3.1 Translation Verification For any procurement involving text content: a.	Both the Vice President of Francophone Affairs and the Manager of Translations must verify and approve the text before an order is placed. b.	Orders containing bilingual text must be reviewed by two (2) individuals at the time of submission to minimize the risk of typographical errors. c.	If a typographical or translation error is identified after an order has been placed, it must be disclosed within 48 hours of recognition, and corrective actions (such as returns, replacements, or discounts) must be taken. 13.3.2 Vendor Selection Vendors shall be selected based on price, quality, reliability, and ethical business practices. Where feasible, preference shall be given to local, ethical, and sustainable vendors, provided they meet the required quality and cost standards. 13.3.3 Conflict of Interest Any Officer, Director, or Committee Member involved in procurement must declare any conflicts of interest before engaging in a purchasing decision. Members shall not personally benefit from the Society's procurement activities. Accepting gifts, hospitality, or favors from vendors is strictly prohibited. 13.3.4 Financial Oversight All purchases must be documented and recorded for transparency and accountability. Invoices, receipts, and quotes must be retained for auditing and reference purposes. The Board of Directors shall review procurement records periodically to ensure policy compliance. 13.4 Compliance Any procurement decision not in compliance with this policy shall be subject to review and corrective action by the Board of Directors. Violations of this policy, including failure to disclose conflicts of interest or financial mismanagement, may result in disciplinary action as determined by the Board. 13.5 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be a policy of the Society, as enacted by the Directors of the Society by resolution on the 22nd day of February, 2025 and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 9th day of March, 2025. Dated the 9th day of March, 2025. Daniel Thorp	 14.0	Language Test Policy 14.1 Purpose The Language Test Policy shall establish a standardized process for evaluating the bilingual proficiency of candidates for positions requiring French-English communication within the Society. It ensures that individuals in these roles possess the necessary language skills to effectively engage with members, fulfill their responsibilities, and contribute to a bilingual and inclusive environment. 14.2 Scope The Language Test Policy shall apply to all candidates for positions within the Society that require bilingual proficiency. It outlines the assessment criteria, testing procedures, recognized certifications, and alternative means of demonstrating language proficiency. This policy also establishes the validity period of test results and the requirements for candidates seeking exemption through certification or educational proof. 14.3 Policy Candidates for positions who are subject to this policy must demonstrate French-English bilingualism with the following: a)	Completing the ESS Language Test, administered unbiasedly by both the VP Francophone Affairs and Manager of Translations-or one of them if either position is vacant--, the test consists of: i)	Part 1: Oral Comprehension & Production Candidates will participate in an in-person interview designed to verify their ability to: 1)	Follow and participate in discussions in French/English, including debates or role-play scenarios relevant to the position. 2)	Engage in live interpretation (oral translation), such as reformulating a short English message into French and vice versa. 3)	Communicate effectively, ensuring clarity and professionalism in interactions as well as the ability to adopt a more colloquial tone when needed.  ii)	Part 2: Writing Comprehension & Production: Candidates will complete tasks, in-person, assessing their ability to: 1)	Write context-appropriate communications in French, including formal and informal messages. 2)	Translate short documents, ensuring the message is clear and suitable for its intended audience (e.g., emails, public announcements). 3)	The evaluation will include materials related to Board of Directors activities, formal communications, and informal social media interactions. iii)	Minimum Proficiency Requirement 1)	Candidates must obtain satisfactory results in all required evaluations to be eligible for the position. 2)	The judging panel will assess candidates using the guide in Appendix B. 3)	This guide will be provided to candidates in advance iv)	Results of the ESS language test will be valid for two (2) years following the completion of the test and may be used to fulfill language requirements in future elections. b)	Language Certification: i)	A certificate from the University of Ottawa's Official Languages and Bilingualism Institute (OLBI) or an equivalent certification recognized by the University (e.g.,      DELF B2 for French, TOEFL for English) obtained in the past 2 years   ii) Applicants who are non-native speakers of both languages may present two separate certificates, one for each language. c)	Educational Proof: i)	Documentation proving the completion of secondary or post-secondary education in French or English, either in Canada or abroad. 1)	Note: Immersion streams will not be accepted. ii)	Proof for the non-covered language must also be presented. d)	If a candidate submits documentation instead of taking the ESS language test, they must also have a conversation in both languages with the VP Francophone and Manager of Translations-or one of them if either position is vacant-- to verify their proficiency and get feedback on any areas for improvement relevant to the role. 14.4 Effective Date This Policy shall be effective when enacted by the Board. CERTIFIED to be a policy of the Society, as enacted and confirmed by the Members of the Society by special resolution on the 9th day of March, 2025. Dated the 9th day of March, 2025. Carolina González 	Maya Benhamou 	Daniel Thorp	  Appendix A - Forms List of Forms Form E1 - Officer Nomination Form E2 - Class Presentation Confirmation Form F1 - Expense Form F2 - Budget Line Request	  Form E1 - Officer Nomination Desired Position:  	__________________________  	     Name:  	__________________________  	     Email:  	__________________________  Nomination Signatures Name Student Number Signature                                              I, the undersigned full-time registered student in the Faculty of Engineering, do hereby accept to be 	nominated 	as 	a 	candidate 	for 	the 	ESS 	elections. Signature:_____________________________ Date:____________________ 	 Form E2 - Class Presentation Candidate: 	__________________________  Course Code Date Prof Signature                                        Form F1 - Expense Report Name: __________________________  Email: __________________________   	(Please fill in with e-transfer email/phone number)  Date: __________________________  Description Budget Line Amount                          Total:   Recipient Signature: _________________________ **For office use only** Amount Approved:  Method of Reimbursement:  Reference/Cheque Number:  Signing Authority Signature:    Form F2 - Budget Line Request (updated one)     Name: __________________________  Position: __________________________       Date: __________________________  Description of budget line:   Budget breakdown:  Item Amount              Total:   Signature: __________________________  **For office use only** Amount Approved:  Budget Line Name:   Appendix B Language proficiency assessment guide  The Society will verify bilingualism through the procedure below, provided by the Official Languages and Bilingualism Institute (OLBI). 1.	Oral Comprehension and Production Candidates will participate in an in-person interview designed to verify their ability to: ●	Follow and participate in discussions in French/English, including debates or role-play scenarios relevant to the position. ●	Engage in live interpretation (oral translation), such as reformulating a short English message into French and vice versa. ●	Communicate effectively with members, ensuring clarity and professionalism in interactions as well as the ability to adopt a more colloquial tone when needed.  2.	Written Comprehension and Production Candidates will complete tasks, in-person, assessing their ability to: ●	Write context-appropriate communications in French, including formal and informal messages. ●	Translate short documents, ensuring the message is clear and suitable for its intended audience (e.g., emails, public announcements). ●	The evaluation will include materials related to Board of Directors activities, formal communications, and informal social media interactions. For the debate (Oral Comprehension and Production) Meets requirements Comments 1. Was the candidate able to follow the conversation in French?     2. Did the candidate demonstrate that they could interact     in French without major difficulty? 3. Was the candidate able to participate in the conversation spontaneously and meaningfully?     4. When speaking, was the candidate's response clear and understandable enough?     5. Could the candidate summarize key points from a discussion/debate in French in a way that made sense?     6. Was the candidate able to switch between colloquial and formal language depending on the context?     For the interpretation task (Oral translation) (Oral Comprehension and Production)     7. When reformulating a message from English to French, did the candidate convey the information clearly and accurately?     8. In an oral translation scenario, did the candidate avoid misunderstandings and maintain the     intent of the message? 9. In an interpretation scenario, were they able to adapt and rephrase effectively if needed?     For the written translation task (Written Comprehension and Production)     1. Does the candidate convey the meaning of the text correctly in their translation?     2. Is their adaptation of the message functional and appropriate for a Francophone audience (even if not perfectly translated)?     3. Is the text clear and suitable for the context (e.g., professional email, public announcement, etc.)?     4. Is the language quality adequate? (e.g.  coherent text, correct grammar)?       Policy and Procedure Manual  Policy and Procedure Manual 1  1  